14 The Respiratory System

I T ’ S A G A S

Without fuel, we wouldn’t get very far on our trip. Our car won’t start without gasoline, our plane would be grounded without jet fuel, and our bodies would die without glucose, the fuel necessary for metabolism. The respiratory system’s primary function is to transport the oxygen from the atmosphere into the bloodstream to be used by cells, tissues, and organs for the processes necessary to sustain life. Remember, during cellular respiration, glucose is broken down to make adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Your body needs oxygen to “burn” glucose, just as your car needs oxygen to burn gasoline. This amazing system is often taken for granted. We don’t even consciously realize that the respiratory system is moving 12,000 quarts of air a day into and out of our lungs. On our journey, the fuel for our means of transportation also produces a waste by-product, or exhaust. For example, our car produces waste gases that it eliminates through its exhaust system. The body also produces a waste gas, carbon dioxide, during metabolism that needs to be eliminated via the respiratory system so it does not build up to toxic levels. In this chapter, we explore the journey that oxygen molecules must take from our surrounding atmosphere to our cells and tissues. Hopefully, your journey through the respiratory system will be a “breathtaking” experience.

LEARNING OUTCOMES

At the end of the journey through this chapter, you will be able to:

• List the basic functions of the respiratory system.

• Differentiate between respiration and ventilation.

• Name and explain the functions of the structures of the upper and lower respiratory tracts.

• Discuss the process of gas exchange at the alveolar level.

• Describe the role of the pleura in protecting the lungs.

• Describe the various skeletal structures related to the respiratory system.

• Explain the actual process and regulation of ventilation.

• Describe pulmonary function testing.

• Discuss several common disorders of the respiratory system.

290

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 290

17/05/18 4:47 PM

CHAPTER 14 • The Respiratory System 291

Pronunciation Guide

Pro• nun•ci•a•tion Correct pronunciation is important in any journey so that you and D

others

e

are f i n

completely i t i o

understood. n s

Here /

is a Parts

“see-and-



say” Pronunciation Guide for the more difficult terms to pronounce in this chapter. Please note that even though there are standard pronunciations, regional variations of the pronunciations can occur.

adenoid (AD eh noid)

lingula (LING gu lah)

alveoli (al VEE oh lye)

mediastinum (MEE dee ah STY num) atelectasis (AT eh LEK tah sis)

medulla oblongata (meh DULL lah OB long GAH tah) bronchi (BRONG kye)

nasopharynx (NAY zoh FAIR inks)

bronchioles (BRONG kee ohlz)

oropharynx (OR oh FAIR inks)

capillaries (KAP ih lair eez)

palatine tonsils (PAL ah tine)

carina (kah RINE uh)

parietal pleura (pah RYE eh tal PLOO rah) cilia (SILL ee ah)

pneumocyte (NEW moh site)

conchae (KONG kay)

respiration (res pir AY shun)

diaphragm (DIE ah fram)

rima glottidis (RIE mah GLAH ti diss) emphysema (EM fih SEE mah)

sternum (STER num)

empyema (EM pye EE mah)

surfactant (sir FAC tant)

epiglottis (ep ih GLAH tiss)

thoracic cage (tho RASS ik)

erythropoiesis (eh RITH roh poy EE sis) trachea (TRAY kee ah)

esophagus (eh SOFF ah gus)

tuberculosis (too BER kew LOH sis) eustachian tubes (yoo STAY she ehn) ventilation (ven tih LAY shun)

glottis (GLAH tiss)

vibrissae (vie BRISS ee)

hilum (HIGH lim)

visceral pleura (VISS er al PLOO rah) larynx (LAIR inks)

SYSTEM OVERVIEW

• Terminal air sacs called alveoli surrounded by a net-Along your journey, you will undoubtedly have plenty of exer-work of capillaries that provide for gas exchange cise walking to see the sights. Have you ever wondered why

• A thoracic cage that houses, protects, and facilitates you feel out of breath or why breathing faster and deeper helps the function of the system

you recover from strenuous exercise? Our body uses energy

• Muscles of breathing that include the main muscle, from the food we eat, but cells can obtain the energy from food the diaphragm, and accessory muscles

only with the help of the vital gas oxygen (O2), which allows for Please take a few minutes to look at FIGURE 14–1 ■. We cellular respiration. Luckily, oxygen is found in relative abun-explore each of these components as we travel through the dance in the atmosphere and therefore in the air we breathe.

respiratory system.

However, when the cells use oxygen, they produce the gaseous waste carbon dioxide (CO2). If allowed to build up in the body, carbon dioxide would become toxic, so the bloodstream carries

A M A Z I N G F A C T S

the carbon dioxide to the lungs to be exhaled and eliminated from the body. The respiratory system’s primary role, therefore, Autocontrol of the Cardiopulmonary System is to bring oxygen from the atmosphere into the bloodstream The cardiovascular and the respiratory, or pulmonary, and to remove the gaseous waste by-product carbon dioxide.

systems function without any conscious effort on your As you can see from this discussion, the respiratory system part. You probably didn’t realize it, but as you read works closely with the heart and circulatory system. Because of the previous paragraph and these last two sentences, this relationship, these two systems are often grouped together your heart beat approximately 70 times and pumped in medicine to form the cardiopulmonary system.

approximately 5 liters of blood around your body.

The respiratory system consists of the following major During that same time, you breathed approximately components:

12 times, moving over 6,000 milliliters of air. Homeo-static control mechanisms, including the autonomic

• Two lungs, the vital organs of the respiratory system nervous system and the hypothalamus, regulate

• Upper and lower airways that conduct, or move, gas ventilation rate, cardiac output, and blood pressure.

into and out of the system

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 291

17/05/18 4:47 PM





292 Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions: An Interactive Journey Nasal cavity

Pharynx

Larynx

Smooth muscle tissue

Respiratory epithelium

Supporting

Trachea

cartilage

Bronchus

Air space

Respiratory

epithelium

Lamina propria

(connective

tissue)

SECTION OF TRACHEA

Lung

Capillaries

Diaphragm

Air space

Squamous

Alveoli

epithelium

ALVEOLAR STRUCTURE

FIGURE 14–1 ■

The components of the respiratory system with micrographs of the respiratory epithelium and alveoli. (Source: Ed Reschke/Photolibrary/

Getty Images; BSIP/Universal Images Group/Getty Images) Ventilation versus Respiration

(N2), but this is an inert gas, which means it does not com-Before beginning our journey, it is important to pave the way bine or interact with anything in the body. Even though with a solid understanding of some commonly confused con-nitrogen travels into the respiratory system and comes out cepts. The air we breathe is a mixture of several gases, as can virtually unchanged, it is vitally important as a support gas be seen from

that keeps the lungs open with its constant volume and TABLE 14–1 ■. The predominant gas is nitrogen pressure. The next greatest concentrated gas is oxygen, and it is very physiologically active within our bodies. You’ll notice that carbon dioxide is in low concentration in the air Table 14–1 Gases in the Atmosphere

we inhale, but it is in much higher concentration in the air we exhale.

GAS

% OF ATMOSPHERE

The respiratory system contains a very intricate network Nitrogen (N2)

78.08

of tubes that moves, or conducts, gas from the atmosphere to deep inside the lungs. This movement of gas is accomplished Oxygen (O2)

20.95

by breathing. However, a more precise look at the process of Carbon dioxide (CO2)

.03

breathing shows that it is actually two separate processes.

The first is ventilation, which is the bulk movement of the Argon

.93

air in and out of the terminal ends of the airways. The process of gas exchange, which occurs deep within the lungs, in Note: The atmosphere also contains trace gases such as neon and krypton.

which oxygen is added to the blood and carbon dioxide is M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 292

17/05/18 4:47 PM





CHAPTER 14 • The Respiratory System 293

removed, is termed respiration. ( Note: The process by which The respiratory system is responsible for providing all the cells make ATP by breaking down glucose is also called body’s oxygen needs and removing carbon dioxide. In fact, respiration: cellular respiration.) Because the gas exchange in the body’s oxygen reserve lasts only about 4–6 minutes. If the lungs occurs between the blood and the air in the external that reserve is used up and additional oxygen is unavailable, atmosphere, it is more precisely called external respiration.

then death is the obvious outcome. Therefore, the body must The oxygenated blood is transported internally via the car-continually replenish its oxygen by bringing in the oxygen diovascular system to the cells and tissues where gas exchange molecules from the atmosphere.

is now termed internal respiration, and oxygen moves into In a general sense, the respiratory system is a series of the cells as carbon dioxide is removed. Therefore, ventila-branching tubes called bronchi and bronchioles that transport tion is not the same thing as respiration. When you watch a the atmospheric gas deep within our lungs to the small air television show in which someone says to place the patient sacs called alveoli, which represent the terminal end of the on a respirator, that term is incorrect. The person should respiratory system. To better visualize this system, look at a say “ventilator” because the machine is only moving the gas stalk of broccoli held upside down. The stalk and its branches mixture into the patient’s lung (ventilating) and not caus-represent the airways, and the green bumpy stuff on the end ing gas exchange. See FIGURE 14–2 ■, which contrasts these is like the terminal alveoli. See? Not only is broccoli good for important processes.

you but it can also be a learning tool!

Alveolus

Oxygen (O2)

Pulmonary capillary Carbon

(at lung site)

dioxide (CO

Interstitial space

2)

CO2

O2

Diaphragm contracts and

Red blood cells

flattens during inhalation

External respiration in the lungs

Systemic capillary

Red blood cells

(at tissue site)

CO2

O2

Interstitial space

CO2

O2

Tissue cell

Internal respiration

Diaphragm relaxes

during exhalation

RESPIRATION

VENTILATION

FIGURE 14–2 ■

Contrast of ventilation and external and internal respiration.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 293

17/05/18 4:47 PM



294 Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions: An Interactive Journey Each alveolus is surrounded by a network of small blood A P P L I E D S C I E N C E

vessels called capillaries. This combination of the alveolar wall and the capillary wall is called the alveolar–capillary GAS EXCHANGE IN PLANTS

membrane and represents the connection, or for you computer Fortunately for us, the physiology of gas exchange in plants is buffs, the interface, between the respiratory and cardiovas-exactly opposite that of humans. Plants take in the CO2 in the cular systems. This is where the vital process of gas exchange atmosphere and use it for energy, then release oxygen into our takes place and therefore it is also referred to as the respira-atmosphere. The earth’s largest source of oxygen released is the Amazon rainforest, which is unfortunately being destroyed tory membrane. Before getting deeper into this process, let’s at a high rate. We truly need a green earth to survive, so thank trace the journey that oxygen molecules must take to arrive the next plant you see.

at the alveolar–capillary membrane.

F O C U S O N P R O F E S S I O N S

The respiratory therapist’s main job is to ensure proper ventilation of the respiratory system through a variety of treatment modalities. Perfusionists, on the other hand, run a machine that actually performs gas exchange. For example, during a heart or lung transplant, the blood supply is temporarily rerouted through a respirator until the new heart or lung is transplanted. Because this procedure requires a lot of time, the rerouted blood must be oxygenated and carbon dioxide removed via a special mechanical membrane. Learn more about these two related and exciting professions by visiting the websites of national organizations, including the American Association for Respiratory Care (AARC), the National Board for Respiratory Care (NBRC), the American Society of Extracorporeal Technology (AmSECT), and the National Association for Medical Direction of Respiratory Care (NAMDRC).

(Source: Phanie/RGB Ventures/

SuperStock/Alamy Stock Photo)

THE UPPER RESPIRATORY TRACT

discussion progresses. The nose is a semirigid structure made The upper airway is responsible for initially conditioning of cartilage and bone. Three main regions are contained the inhaled air. It consists of the nose, mouth, pharynx, and within the space behind the nose, called the nasal cavity.

larynx and performs several other important functions.

The nasal cavity is separated into right and left halves by The upper airway begins at the two openings of the nose, a wall called the nasal septum (or septal cartilage), made of called nares, or nostrils, and ends at the vocal cords (see bone and cartilage . The regions contained within each nasal cavity are the vestibular, olfactory, and respiratory regions.

FIGURE 14–3 ■). The functions of the upper airway include: See FIGURE 14–4 ■.

• Heating or cooling inspired (inhaled) gases to body The vestibular region is located inside the nostrils and temperature (98.6°F [37°C])

contains the coarse nasal hairs that act as the first line of

• Filtering particles from the inspired gases defense for the respiratory system. These hairs, called

• Humidifying inspired gases to a relative humidity vibrissae, are covered with sebum, a greasy substance secreted of 100%

by the sebaceous glands of the nose. Sebum helps trap large

• Providing for the sense of smell, or olfaction particles and also keeps the nose hairs soft and pliable—

• Producing sounds, or phonation

those unwanted nose hairs really do have a role as a gross

• Ventilating, or conducting, the gas down to the particle filter. (By the way, gross in this case means “large.”) lower airways

The vestibular region helps filter out large particles so they do not enter the lungs, where they could irritate and clog The Nose

the airways.

Although some people do breathe in through their mouths, The air from the atmosphere must be warmed to body under normal circumstances we were meant to breathe in temperature and must also be moistened so the airways and through the nose for reasons that will become clear as this the lungs do not dry out. This is a job for the respiratory M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 294

17/05/18 4:47 PM





CHAPTER 14 • The Respiratory System 295

Adduction

Abduction

Base of

the tongue

Epiglottis

Hard palate

Soft palate

Vestibular

Tonsil

fold (False

Tongue

vocal cord)

Upper

airway

Cuneiform

cartilage

Mandible

Epiglottis

Vocal fold

Vocal cords

(true vocal cord)

Hyoid bone

Corniculate

Inner lining

Trachea

cartilage

of trachea

Esophagus

FIGURE 14–3 ■

The upper airway and vocal cords.

Olfactory region

Superior, middle

Respiratory

and inferior

region

nasal conchae

Vestibular

region

Nare

Hard palate

Soft palate

Tonsil

Tongue

Mandible

Epiglottis

Hyoid bone

Vocal cords

Trachea

Esophagus

FIGURE 14–4 ■

The nasal regions.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 295

17/05/18 4:47 PM

296 Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions: An Interactive Journey region of the nasal cavity, which is lined with mucous mem-incoming air to make contact with the warm, moist nasal branes that are richly supplied with blood. The respiratory mucosa. Whereas the respiratory region has a small volume of region possesses three scroll-like bones known as turbinates, 20 milliliters, if you could unfold the turbinates, you would or conchae (again see Figure 14–4). These split the cavity have a surface area of 106 square centimeters (about the size of into three channels, thereby providing more surface area for a 3 × 5-inch index card) .

A M A Z I N G F A C T S

Why Do We Breathe through Our Mouths?

You may have seen your favorite football player wearing Therefore, mouth breathing predominates during stress an odd-looking strip of plastic across the nose. This is to and exercise because it is easier for the gas to travel help make breathing easier by increasing the diameter through the larger oral opening, due to less resistance.

of the nostrils. The nose is responsible for one-half to Of course, when you get a head cold and your nasal two-thirds of the total airway resistance in breathing.

passages become blocked by secretions, it becomes Airway resistance represents the work required to move necessary to breathe through the easier, open route of the gas down the tube. The larger the tube, the less the mouth. On your journey, you must always be ready resistance and therefore less work involved in breathing.

for detours.

In addition, because the nasal cavity is no longer a straight pretty impressive humidification process. When the furnace in passageway, the air current becomes turbulent, so more air your house turns on in cold weather, this may dry the inspired makes contact with these richly vascularized mucous mem-air significantly and make it harder for your respiratory region branes that transmit heat and moisture to the inspired gas.

to work. Therefore, humidifying this dry gas with water, such Incredibly, these moist mucous membranes add 650–1,000

as from a room humidifier, may keep added stress off your milliliters (almost 3–4 cups) of water each day to moisten body’s natural humidification system. The nasal cavity is lined inspired air to 80% relative humidity within the respiratory with pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium. (See the region of the nasal cavity. In such a short distance, this is a discussion of the mucociliary escalator in the next section.)

A M A Z I N G F A C T S

Breath Test May Detect Cancer

In the past, people have reported dogs that were able to not allow the gas to reach deeper into your lungs. This sniff out cancerous (malignant) growths. Recent research is a relatively safe way to sample a potentially noxious by Israeli scientists is proving this to be not so “far-fetched.”

or dangerous gas without taking a deep breath into the They are developing an electronic sensor that samples lungs, where it could cause severe damage. It is interest-the breath and can detect lung, breast, bowel, and ing to note that your ability to taste is related to your sense prostate cancers by chemical variations related to the of smell. If you have ever had a nasty head cold and specific tumors.

could not taste your food, now you know why. (Remember The olfactory region is strategically placed on the that we can only sense five different tastes, but recent roof of the nasal cavity. The advantage to this is that sniff-research indicates we may be able to differentiate up to a ing inspired gas into this region keeps it there and does trillion different odors.)

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 296

17/05/18 4:47 PM





CHAPTER 14 • The Respiratory System 297

T E S T Y O U R K N O W L E D G E 1 4 – 1

Choose the best answer.

1. Which gas is found in the atmosphere?

5. Which of the following takes place in the upper airways?

a. Oxygen

c. Carbon dioxide

a. Olfaction

c. Filtering of air

b. Nitrogen

d. All of the above

b. Warming of air

d. All of the above

2. The process of moving gas into and out of the respiratory 6. Which of the following separates the nasal cavity into system is:

right and left halves?

a. ventilation.

c. internal respiration.

a. Nasal septum

c. Olfactory region

b. external respiration.

d. diffusion.

b. Hard palate

d. Inferior nasal conchae

3. The process of gas exchange at the body tissues is 7. Which of the following is not a role of the sinuses?

called:

a. Intensifies voice sound

a. ventilation.

c. internal respiration.

b. Makes the head lighter

b. external respiration.

d. osmosis.

c. Required for speech

d. Assists in moisturizing inhaled air

4. Gas exchange takes place across the:

a. bronchi.

Answer the following.

b. bronchioles.

c. alveolar–capillary membrane.

8. The medical term for the sense of smell is _______________

d. nasal cavity.

and for producing sound is _______________.

Going to Ride the Mucociliary Escalator cilia on its surface. Cilia are hairlike projections that can beat at The epithelial lining of the nasal cavity plays a very important a fantastic rate. Think of them as super rowers in a boat.

role in keeping the respiratory system clean and free of debris.

Goblet cells and submucosal glands are interspersed in the Cells in the epithelial layer (or respiratory mucosa) are pseu-respiratory mucosa and produce about 100 milliliters (about dostratified ( pseudo = false, stratified = layered) ciliated columnar cells 3 ounces) of mucus per day. The mucus actually resides as two and are found not only in the respiratory region of the nasal cav-layers. The cilia reside in the sol layer, which contains thin, ity but also throughout most of the airways. See watery fluid that allows them to beat freely. The gel layer is FIGURE 14–5 ■.

Remember that the pseudostratified epithelium is a single layer on top of the sol layer; as its name suggests, it is more vis-of tall, columnlike cells with nuclei located at different heights, cous or gelatinous in nature. This sticky gel layer traps small giving the false appearance of two layers of cells, when in fact particles, such as dust or pathogens, on the mucous blanket, there is only one—hence the term pseudostratified columnar. Now much like flypaper. Once the debris is trapped on the mucous all we need to add is the cilia. Each columnar cell has 200–250

blanket, it must be removed from the respiratory system.

Surface goblet cells

Gel layer

Mucus blanket

Sol layer

Pseudostratified

Cilia

ciliated columnar

epithelium

Basement

Smooth muscle

membrane

Submucosal

gland

Parasympathetic

nerve

Cartilaginous

layer

FIGURE 14–5 ■

The mucociliary escalator with corresponding micrograph. (Source: Jose Luis Calvo/Shutterstock) M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 297

17/05/18 4:47 PM

298 Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions: An Interactive Journey So how does this layer of mucus actually work? The columnar epithelium, located in the airways of the lungs, microscopic, hairlike cilia act as tiny “oars,” and in propels the gel layer toward the oral cavity to be either Figure 14–5, you can see that these oars rest in the watery expectorated with a cough or swallowed into the stomach.

sol layer. They beat at an incredible rate of 1,000–1,500

Some texts refer to this epithelial layer as the mucociliary times per minute and propel the gel layer and its trapped escalator, which gives a better picture of what it does. This debris onward and upward about 1 inch per minute to escalator works 24/7, unless something paralyzes it, such be expelled from the body. The pseudostratified ciliated as smoking.

C L I N I C A L A P P L I C A T I O N

EXCESSIVE MUCUS PRODUCTION

In some diseases—for example, chronic bronchitis and fight an infection. Mucus turns green when enzymes (from cystic fibrosis—excess mucus is produced that will need the defense cells) that fight bacteria are activated. Mucus to be expectorated or swallowed. The color of the expecto-that is red or brown could indicate the presence of fresh or rant is clinically useful. In general, clear mucus is usually old blood and tends to indicate that bleeding has occurred, normal unless there is an excessive amount, which may which is often seen in lung cancer or advanced tubercu-indicate irritation or the beginning of an inflammatory pro-losis. Cystic fibrosis is an inherited disease that affects the cess. Look if there are other symptoms that may indicate glands and causes them to secrete very thick mucus. This infections. Yellow and green sputum indicates an infection blocks the airways and increases the susceptibility to bacte-but also indicates that the immune system is helping to rial infections.

The Sinuses

sound produced by the voice. If you ever shouted inside a Have you ever heard of someone being called an airhead?

cave, you noticed a more resonant quality to the sound. In Technically, we are all airheads because the skull contains addition, it is theorized the air-filled sinuses help to lighten hollow, air-filled cavities (commonly called sinuses) that con-the heavy head that sits atop the neck. Not all of the sinuses nect with the nasal cavity via small passageways. Because exist at birth; rather, they develop as you grow and influence these are located around the nose, they are called paranasal facial changes as you mature. Sinuses also provide further sinuses. They are lined with a respiratory mucosa layer that warming and moisturizing of inhaled air.

continually drains its secretions into the nasal cavity. The sinuses are named for the specific facial bones in which they The Pharynx

are located: the ethmoid, sphenoid, maxilla, and frontal The pharynx is a hollow, muscular structure about 2½ inches bones (see FIGURE 14–6 ■).

long, lined with epithelial tissues. The pharynx begins pos-These cavities of air in the bones of the cranium are terior to the nasal cavities and is divided into the following believed to help in the prolongation and intensification of three sections, as shown in FIGURE 14–7 ■ by the different-colored segments.

• Nasopharynx

• Oropharynx

Frontal

Frontal

• Laryngopharynx

sinus

sinus

Ethmoid

Ethmoid

The nasopharynx is the uppermost section of the pharynx sinus

sinuses

and begins just posterior to the two nasal cavities. Air that is Maxillary

Sphenoid

breathed through the nose passes through the nasopharynx.

sinus

sinus

Maxillary

This section also contains lymphatic tissue of the immune sinus

system, called the adenoids, and passageways to the middle ear, called eustachian tubes (or auditory tubes). You can understand how an infection located in the nasal cavities can lead FIGURE 14–6 ■

to an ear infection, and vice versa. The nasopharynx is lined The paranasal sinuses.

with respiratory mucosa.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 298

17/05/18 4:47 PM



CHAPTER 14 • The Respiratory System 299

Superior, middle

The Larynx

and inferior

nasal conchae

The larynx, located in the neck, is a triangular chamber NASOPHARYNX

inferior to the pharynx that houses the important structures Hard palate

needed for speech. Commonly known as the voice box, the lar-Soft palate

ynx is a semirigid structure composed of several types of car-Tonsil

tilage connected by muscles and ligaments that provide for Tongue

movement of the vocal cords to control speech. The thyroid OROPHARYNX

cartilage is the largest of the cartilages found in the larynx.

LARYNGOPHARYNX

The “Adam’s apple” is part of the thyroid cartilage and is Mandible

Epiglottis

more prominent in males. Inferior to the thyroid cartilage, Hyoid bone

Vocal Larynx

forming the inferior border of the larynx, is the cricoid carti-Thyroid cartilage

cords

lage. Both of these cartilages found in the neck are necessary Cricoid cartilage

Trachea

to provide structure and support for airways so they do not Esophagus

collapse and block the flow of air into and out of the lungs.

A third cartilage, the epiglottal cartilage, is a leaf-shaped, FIGURE 14–7 ■

flaplike structure located above the opening into the larynx The nasopharynx, oropharynx, and laryngopharynx called the epiglottis. The epiglottis covers the larynx during and related structures.

swallowing. The other cartilages in the larynx are supportive structures for the vocal cords.

The oropharynx is the next region and is located posterior The vocal cords are paired membranes located inside the to the oral (buccal) cavity. Air that is breathed through the larynx. The glottis is the sound-producing structure contain-mouth as well as air that is breathed through the nose passes ing the vocal cords. The space between the vocal cords is through here. It is important to note that anything that is called the rima glottidis. The glottis allows gas to travel to swallowed also passes through this section. Therefore, the the trachea and eventually the lungs. Your voice is produced oropharynx conducts not only air but also food and liquid.

when air is forced past the partially closed vocal cords, causing For added protection, the oropharynx is lined with stratified them to vibrate. You normally speak during an exhalation.

squamous epithelium.

Air that is breathed and anything that is swallowed passes The oral entrance is a strategic area to place “guardians”

through the laryngopharynx. Then a choice must be made.

for the immune system because this is where pathogens can Swallowed materials should pass through the esophagus to easily enter the body. Lymphoid tissue, or tonsils, such as the get to the stomach, and air should travel through the larynx palatine tonsils, are located in this area. Another set of ton-and then the trachea on its way to the lungs. Food and air sils, the lingual tonsils, are found at the back of the tongue.

are directed by a mechanism termed the glottic or sphincter During the process of swallowing, the uvula and soft pal-mechanism (swallowing reflex). The epiglottis closes over the ate move in a posterior and superior position to protect the opening to the larynx when you swallow and opens up when nasopharynx and nasal cavity from allowing food or liquid you breathe. The glottic mechanism facilitates the closing to enter. Actually swallow and feel this happening within of the epiglottis over the glottic opening, thus sealing it so your oral cavity. This protection can be overcome by force-food does not enter the lungs. In addition, the soft palate ful laughter, and that is why when you laugh with liquid or blocks the nasal cavity, and the tongue blocks the oral cavity food in your mouth, the food or liquid can sometimes come during swallowing so food can only travel in one direction, up through your nose.

into the esophagus.

The laryngopharynx is the lowermost portion of the phar-Thus, the lungs are closed to traffic when you swallow, and ynx; an older term for it was the hypopharynx because of its the food and liquid travel down the only open tube or route, position. Air that is breathed and anything that is swallowed the esophagus, leading into the stomach. When we breathe passes through the laryngopharynx. Swallowed materials pass in, the gas preferentially travels into the lungs through a through the esophagus to get to the stomach, and air travels process that actually draws it there because of pressure dif-through the larynx (the next part of the respiratory system) and ferences. More on this later.

then the trachea on its way to the lungs. What directs the flow The vocal cords are the area of division between the upper of “traffic” (air to the lungs and food and liquid to the stom-and lower airways. The lower airways start inferior to the ach)? Is it a tiny highway worker directing traffic? No, it is vocal cords. Now we continue our journey down the lower directed by the swallowing reflex, which is discussed shortly.

airways all the way down to the end point, or alveoli.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 299

17/05/18 4:47 PM



300 Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions: An Interactive Journey

C L I N I C A L A P P L I C A T I O N

KEEPING THE VITAL AIRWAY OPEN

Just like any vital highway, the airway needs to remain inflatable cuff to seal the airway once it is in place. Knowl-open to a flow of traffic, or the oxygen molecules will edge that the vocal cords open and close during breathing cease to flow into the alveoli and therefore not get into the becomes clinically significant when intubating a patient.

bloodstream to supply the tissues. Whereas a traffic jam Adduction partially seals the vocal cords and occurs during can last for hours, oxygen flow can be disrupted for only expiration, whereas abduction opens the cords, increas-a few minutes without tragic results. For example, if the ing the size of the glottic opening during inspiration. If the upper airway swells shut from a severe allergic reaction patient is breathing, it is better to pass the tube with the to a bee sting, an emergency airway must be established.

deflated cuff through the narrow opening of the vocal cords Remember, we only have 4–6 minutes of oxygen reserve.

during an inhalation when the cords are maximally open.

Review Figure 14–7, and you will see a space between Conversely, when removing the tube (extubation), the health the thyroid and cricoid cartilages. This is where an emer-care professional must always remember to deflate the cuff gency cricoidthyroidotomy is performed. This space has so it doesn’t damage the cords as the tube is pulled back few blood vessels or nerves, which makes it ideal in an through them. It should go without saying (no pun intended) emergency situation to place a temporary breathing tube.

that a patient cannot talk when properly intubated because Sometimes a longer-term breathing tube must be the vocal cords cannot function. If you ever see a TV soap inserted into the lungs via a technique called intubation.

opera or movie where someone is plainly talking with a tube This tube passes through the vocal cords and sits above going down his or her mouth into the lungs, you will know it the juncture (carina) between the right and left lung. A is impossible. More permanent airways, called tracheostomy machine called a ventilator can move air into and out tubes, are placed in the neck. Some patients can learn to of the damaged lungs at this juncture. The tube has an talk with a specialized tracheostomy tube in place.

T E S T Y O U R K N O W L E D G E 1 4 – 2

Choose the best answer.

1. The hairlike structures that propel mucus in the airways c. respiratory mucosa; pseudostratified ciliated epithelium are:

d. simple cuboidal epithelium; pseudostratified ciliated a. sol layer.

c. pathogens.

epithelium

b. gel layer.

d. cilia.

6. Voice is normally produced by vibration of the closed 2. Which of the following is not true about the sinuses?

vocal cords during:

a. They are air-filled cavities.

a. inspiration.

b. They are located in the skull and around the nose.

b. exhalation.

c. They help to lighten the head.

c. internal respiration.

d. Gas exchange occurs there.

d. external respiration.

3. Food is prevented from entering the _______________

7. The upper airway begins at the _______________ and when eating by the closure of the _______________.

ends at the _______________.

a. esophagus; uvula

c. trachea; epiglottis

a. tonsils, alveoli

b. esophagus; epiglottis

d. epiglottis; glottis

b. nares, bronchi

c. nares, vocal cords

4. The vocal cords are found in the:

d. vocal cords, alveoli

a. laryngopharynx.

c. oropharynx.

b. nasopharynx.

d. larynx.

8. The pharynx can be divided into three sections. Which of the following is one of the three sections?

5. The oropharynx is lined with _______________, whereas a. Trachea

the nasopharynx is lined with _______________.

b. Esophagus

a. respiratory mucosa; stratified squamous epithelium c. Larynx

b. stratified squamous epithelium; respiratory mucosa d. Oropharynx

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 300

17/05/18 4:47 PM



CHAPTER 14 • The Respiratory System 301

THE LOWER RESPIRATORY TRACT

The trachea is the largest bronchus and can be thought of The airway network that leads to the lungs and then branches as the trunk of the tracheobronchial tree. Once the trachea out into the various lung segments resembles an upside-reaches the center of the chest approximately at the level of down tree and is sometimes called the tracheobronchial tree.

vertebrae T5, it begins its first branching, or bifurcates, into See

two bronchi ( bronchus is the singular form), the right mainstem FIGURE 14–8 ■.

and the left mainstem. The site of bifurcation into the right and left lung is called the carina (again, see Figure 14–8).

Trachea and Bronchi

One bronchus goes to the right lung and the other bronchus After leaving the larynx, the inspired air enters the trachea, goes to the left lung. The mainstem bronchi are sometimes also known by the lay term windpipe. The trachea extends also referred to as the primary bronchi. Now the bronchi must from the cricoid cartilage of the larynx to the fifth thoracic branch into the five lobar bronchi, one in each of the five vertebrae (approximately to the midpoint of the chest). The lobes of the lungs.

cartilage found in the anterior portion of the trachea is in the Each lung lobe is further divided into specific segments, form of C-shaped structures to provide rigidity and protec-and the next branching of bronchi is called the segmental tion for the exposed airway in the neck. The posterior parts of bronchi. At the point from the trachea down to the segmen-the rings are smooth muscle. This C shape also serves another tal bronchi, the tissue layers of the bronchial walls are all the important purpose. The esophagus lies in the area where the same, only smaller, as they branch downward. The first layer C opens up posteriorly. Without the cartilage, there is some is the epithelial layer (remember the mucociliary escalator?)

“give” in the posterior aspect of the larynx and trachea, so that keeps the area clean of debris. A middle lamina propria the esophagus can expand when you swallow larger chunks of layer contains smooth muscle, lymph, and nerve tracts. The food, and the food won’t get stuck against the rigid cartilage third layer is the protective and supportive cartilaginous of the trachea. The trachea is lined with respiratory mucosa.

layer (see FIGURE 14–9 ■).

Thyroid

cartilage

Larynx

Cricoid

cartilage

Trachea

Right lung

Left lung

Right Upper lobe

Left mainstem

bronchus

Right mainstem

bronchus

Left Upper lobe

Carina

Right

Middle

Cardiac

lobe

impression

Left

Lower

Right

lobe

Lower

lobe

FIGURE 14–8 ■

The tracheobronchial tree.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 301

17/05/18 4:47 PM



302 Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions: An Interactive Journey Smooth Cartilage

muscle

Bronchus

Pulmonary artery

Lamina propria

Epithelium

FIGURE 14–9 ■

Tissue layers in the bronchi.

C L I N I C A L A P P L I C A T I O N

THE ANGLE MAKES A DIFFERENCE

The angle of branching is not the same for both sides of enter the lung with a bronchoscope to remove the object.

the tracheobronchial tree. The right mainstem branches off Time may be critical, and it may make a difference if the at a 20- to 30-degree angle from the midline of the chest.

search is begun immediately in the right lung because its The left mainstem branches off at a more pronounced 40-structure increases the probability that the object has lodged to 60-degree angle. This is important because the lesser there. In addition, a breathing tube or endotracheal tube angle of the right mainstem branching allows foreign bod-may be placed too far into the lung, and instead of sitting ies that are accidentally breathed in to more often lodge in above the carina so both lungs are ventilated, the tube most the right lung. This is useful to know if a child has aspirated likely will pass into and ventilate only the right lung. This is (taken into the lung) an object, and the physician must why an x-ray for proper tube placement is so important.

The branching becomes more numerous with tiny subseg-millimeter in diameter. They have no cartilage layer, and the mental bronchi branching deep within each lung segment.

epithelial lining becomes ciliated cuboidal (short square cells The diameter of subsegmental bronchi ranges from 1 to 6 mil-as opposed to large columns). The bronchioles have smooth limeters. Cartilaginous rings are now irregular pieces of carti-muscle in their walls. The cilia, goblet cells, and submucosal lage and will soon fade away completely. Notice as we move gland are almost all gone at this point. There is no gas exchange toward the gas exchange regions that the airways simplify to yet—just simple conduction of the gas mixture containing the make it easier for gas molecules to pass through. Now we reach oxygen molecules down the tree. Now we reach the terminal the very tiny airways called bronchioles; they average only 1

bronchioles, which have an average diameter of 0.5 millimeter, M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 302

17/05/18 4:47 PM





CHAPTER 14 • The Respiratory System 303

no goblet cells, no cartilage, no cilia, and no submucosal which are flat, pancakelike cells called simple squamous epi-glands. This marks the end of the conducting zone. We now thelial cells known as pneumocytes. Alveolar ducts originate journey into the gas exchange or respiratory zone of the lung.

from the respiratory bronchioles wherein the walls of the alve-The next airway beyond the terminal bronchiole is called olar ducts are completely made up of simple squamous cells the respiratory bronchiole because a small portion of gas arranged in a tubular configuration. The alveolar ducts give exchange takes place here. The epithelial lining is simple way to the grape bunchlike structures of several connected cuboidal cells interspersed with actual alveoli-type cells, alveoli, better known as the alveolar sacs. See FIGURE 14–10 ■.

Terminal bronchiole

Respiratory

bronchiole

Alveolar sac

Alveolar duct

Alveolus

Alveolus

Pulmonary

vein

Pulmonary

artery

Capillaries

STRUCTURES OF

THE LUNGS

Trachea

Main stem bronchi

Cartilaginous

Lobar bronchi

airways

Conducting zone

Segmental bronchi

Subsegmental bronchi

Bronchioles

Noncartilaginous

airways

Terminal bronchioles

Respiratory bronchioles

Gas exchange

Respiratory zone

Alveolar ducts

region

Alveolar sacs

FIGURE 14–10 ■

Conduction and gas exchange structures and functions.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 303

17/05/18 4:47 PM

304 Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions: An Interactive Journey At this point, the walls are simple squamous epithelium—no particles as the macrophages wander throughout the alveoli.

muscle, no cartilage, no cilia, no mucus; in other words, as There are even small holes between the alveoli called pores of simple as possible to allow for gas exchanges.

Kohn that allow the macrophages to move from one alveolus The alveoli are the terminal air sacs that are surrounded to another.

by numerous pulmonary capillaries and together make up On closer inspection of the alveolar capillary membrane, the gas exchange unit of the lung known as the alveolar you will see four distinct components. The first layer is the capillary membrane. The average number of alveoli in an liquid surfactant layer that lines the alveoli. This phos-adult lung ranges from 300 million to 600 million. This pholipid helps lower the surface tension in these very tiny gives it a massive surface area (about the size of a tennis spheres (alveoli) that would otherwise collapse due to the court) for the oxygen molecule to diffuse across into the sur-high surface tension.

rounding pulmonary capillaries, which have about the same cross-sectional area. Once again, we see an example of the body increasing surface area by dividing a structure into mil-A P P L I E D S C I E N C E

lions of tiny segments. The blood entering the pulmonary capillaries comes from the right side of the heart and is low THE AMAZING SURFACTANT

in oxygen and high in carbon dioxide because it just came Not only does surfactant lower the surface tension when the from the body tissues. Gas exchange or external respiration alveoli are small (end-expiration), thereby preventing alveoli takes place, and the blood leaving the pulmonary capillary collapse, but when you take a deep breath (end-inspiration), your alveoli get larger and the surfactant layer thins and is high in oxygen and travels to the left side of the heart to becomes less effective, its surface tension increasing because be pumped around to the tissues. Conversely, carbon dioxide of its thinning. This prevents overexpansion or rupture of the molecules are in high concentration in the pulmonary capil-alveoli. Lack of surfactant can cause stiff lungs that resist lary blood and very low in the lung (remember, there is little expansion. Surfactant develops late in fetal development, and premature babies therefore may not have sufficient levels.

CO2 in the atmosphere), so CO2 leaves the blood and enters Without immediate intervention, their tiny lungs would collapse the lung to be exhaled.

(atelectasis) and thus prevent vital gas exchange. If they are given too much volume to re-expand their stiff lungs, the alveoli may rupture, again because surfactant is not there to prevent

C L I N I C A L A P P L I C A T I O N

overexpansion. Surfactant also has an antibacterial property that helps fight harmful pathogens. Fortunately, medical sci-THERAPEUTIC OXYGEN

ence has developed surfactant replacement therapy that can Often, a distressed respiratory system and sometimes instill surfactant into the lungs to maintain their function until babies have matured and can produce it on their own.

the cardiac system need supplemental oxygen to assist its function and meet its needs. There are many ways to deliver an enriched oxygen supply to the lungs, including an oxygen mask, nasal cannula (prongs), and specialized The second component is the actual tissue layer, or alveolar devices to deliver both oxygen and extra humidity to the epithelium, comprised of type I and type II pneumocytes. The lungs to assist their function.

third component of the alveolar capillary membrane is the interstitial space. This is the area that separates the basement membrane of alveolar epithelium from the basement mem-There are three types of cells in the alveoli. The majority brane of the capillary endothelium and contains interstitial (95%) of the alveolar surface consists of flat, thin, pancake-fluid. This space is so small that the membranes of the alveoli like cells called squamous pneumocytes, or Type I cells. Gas and capillary appear fused. However, if too much fluid gets molecules can easily pass through these cells in the process into this space (interstitial edema), the membranes separate, of gas exchange. The alveoli also need to produce surfac-which makes it harder for gas exchange to occur because the tant. This is where the Type II granular pneumocytes come in.

gas has to travel a greater distance and through a congested, These highly metabolic cells not only produce surfactant but fluid-filled space.

they also aid in cellular repair responsibilities. Finally, this The fourth component is the capillary endothelium (simple area needs to be free of debris that would act as barriers to squamous epithelium) that forms the wall of the capillary.

the vital process of gas exchange. The “cleanup” cells, called The capillary contains the blood with the red blood cells that Type III cells or wandering macrophages, ingest foreign carry the precious gas cargo to its destination.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 304

17/05/18 4:47 PM

CHAPTER 14 • The Respiratory System 305

C L I N I C A L A P P L I C A T I O N

WHAT CAN GO WRONG WITH GAS EXCHANGE?

The membrane between the alveoli and the capillaries is known as the PaO2 decreases because less oxygen can get quite thin. In fact, it is only 0.004-millimeter thick. The thin-into the blood, and the PaCO2 in the arterial blood increases ness of this membrane aids in the diffusion of the gases because less CO2 crosses into the lungs to be exhaled.

between the lungs and the blood. Anything that would act Red blood cells, or erythrocytes, are responsible for the as a barrier to oxygen molecules getting to or through this bulk of the transportation of oxygen and a little carbon diox-barrier would decrease the amount of oxygen that gets into ide in the blood via a protein- and iron-containing molecule the blood. For example, excessive secretions and fluid such called hemoglobin, which performs the actual transporta-as in pneumonia act as a barrier and reduce the oxygen tion. It is estimated that there are about 280 million hemo-levels in the blood, which can be measured by sampling globin molecules found in each erythrocyte. Carbon dioxide arterial blood and analyzing the amount of each gas dis-is mainly carried in your blood as bicarbonate ions. For solved in it. This is called an arterial blood gas, or ABG. In more information on the bicarbonate buffering system of the case of severe pneumonia, the level of arterial oxygen your blood, see Chapter 17.

C L I N I C A L A P P L I C A T I O N

ASSESSING VENTILATION AND BLOOD pH

Carbon dioxide levels are the best indicator of ventila-greatly reduce the amount in the blood available for the tion. Due to the rapid diffusion of carbon dioxide to the tissues. Therefore, the number of red blood cells and the lungs and its subsequent exhalation, it can be used as amount of hemoglobin in your blood (both of which can be a measure of the efficiency of ventilation. In many lung measured) is important in oxygen delivery to your tissues.

diseases, carbon dioxide levels can rise in the blood and Your body can attempt to respond to low oxygen levels initially form carbonic acid (H2CO3). This acid quickly by producing more red blood cells by a process called breaks down into its ionic parts, H+ (hydronium ion) and erythropoiesis. This process begins when the kidneys HCO −

3 (bicarbonate ion). To prevent too much acidity detect low levels of oxygen coming to them from the blood.

from building up in the blood, H+ will be excreted by the The kidneys release into the bloodstream a hormone kidneys, and more bicarbonate (base) will be formed to called erythropoietin. This substance travels through the buffer the blood to maintain normal pH.

blood and eventually reaches specialized cells found in In general, if the hemoglobin is carrying large the red bone marrow. When stimulated, these specialized amounts of oxygen, the blood will be bright red. If there is cells begin to increase their production of erythrocytes less oxygen and more carbon dioxide being carried, then until demand is met. Having too little iron in the body the blood will be darker in color. Venous blood has lower can also affect oxygen delivery because the iron in the levels of oxygen and higher levels of carbon dioxide. As a hemoglobin is what holds on to the oxygen molecules. The result, venous blood has a dark red tint. Low levels of red terms iron-poor blood and tired blood come from the fact blood cells or anemia would limit the number of hemo-that a patient with low levels of iron tires easily due to low globin molecules that could transport oxygen and thus oxygen levels.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 305

17/05/18 4:47 PM



306 Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions: An Interactive Journey T E S T Y O U R K N O W L E D G E 1 4 – 3

Choose the best answer.

1. The largest bronchus or trunk of the tracheobronchial 5. The alveolar layer that lowers surface tension to keep the tree is the:

alveoli expanded is the:

a. right mainstem bronchus.

a. surfactant layer.

b. left mainstem bronchus.

b. capillary layer.

c. bronchiole.

c. epithelium layer.

d. trachea.

d. macrophage layer.

2. The site of bifurcation of the right and left lungs is called 6. The alveolar cell that allows for gas exchange is the: the:

a. squamous cell.

a. alveoli.

b. granular cell.

b. carina.

c. macrophage cell.

c. trachea.

d. Kohn cell.

d. capillary.

7. What are the three types of cells found in the alveoli?

3. If an object is aspirated into the airways, it is most likely a. Squamous pneumocytes, granular pneumocytes, and to go to the:

macrophages

a. right lung.

b. Type II, Type III, and Type VI cells

b. left lung.

c. Simple squamous epithelium, pseudostratified epithe-c. stomach.

lium, and ciliated columnar epithelium

d. oropharynx.

d. Simple squamous epithelium, pseudostratified epithelium, and pseudostratified columnar epithelium 4. The first portion of the airway where gas exchange begins is the:

Complete the following.

a. terminal bronchiole.

8. The iron-containing molecule responsible for transport-b. trachea.

ing oxygen in the blood is _______________.

c. mainstem bronchus.

d. respiratory bronchiole.

THE HOUSING OF THE LUNGS

contains a slippery liquid called pleural fluid that greatly AND RELATED STRUCTURES

reduces the friction as an individual breathes. Remember The lungs reside in the thoracic cavity and are separated by that serous membranes have only a potential space between a region called the mediastinum, which contains the esopha-them. The visceral and parietal pleura are essentially “lay-gus, heart, great vessels (superior and inferior vena cava and ered” together. There is practically no space between them.

aorta), and trachea (see

(This is the second serous membrane we have seen; the peri-FIGURE 14–11 ■).

Breathing in and out causes the lungs to move within the cardium is also a serous membrane.) thoracic cavity. Over time, an irritation could occur as the lungs rub the inside of the thoracic cage. To prevent such The Lungs

damage, each lung is wrapped in a serous membrane called The right and left lungs are cone-shaped organs; the rounded the pleura. The inner layer of the pleura covering the lungs is peak is called the apex of the lung. The apices (plural of apex) called the visceral pleura. The thoracic cavity and the upper of the lungs extend 1–2 inches above the clavicle. The bases of side of the diaphragm are lined with the outer layer of this the lungs rest on the right and left hemidiaphragm. The right membrane, the parietal pleura. Between these two pleural lung base is a little higher than the left to accommodate the layers is a microscopic intrapleural space (pleural cavity) that large liver lying underneath. The medial surface of the lung has M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 306

17/05/18 4:47 PM





CHAPTER 14 • The Respiratory System 307

Intercostal muscle

Parietal

pleura

Pleural

cavity

Trachea

Lung

Visceral

Apex of lung

pleura

Clavicle

Rib

Upper lobe

of right lung

Hilum

Upper lobe of

Rib

left lung

Horizontal

Parietal pleura

fissure

Cardiac impression

Middle

Oblique fissure

lobe

Lower lobe of

Oblique

left lung

fissure

Visceral pleura

Lower

lobe

Heart

Pleural cavity

in mediastinum

region

FIGURE 14–11 ■

Structures of the thoracic cavity.

a deep, concave cavity that contains the heart and is therefore position. For example, the apical segment of the right upper called the cardiac impression and is deeper on the left side. The lobe is the top portion or tip of the right upper lobe. Remem-hilum is the area where the two mainstem bronchi and associ-ber, the segmental bronchi enter each lung segment. See ated structures attach to each lung. This is also referred to as the FIGURE 14–12 ■.

root of each lung. Each root contains the mainstem bronchus, pulmonary artery and vein, nerve tracts, and lymph vessels.

The right lung has three lobes—the upper, middle, and The Protective Bony Thorax

lower lobes—that are divided by the horizontal and oblique The lungs, heart, and great vessels are all protected by the fissures. The left lung has only one fissure, the oblique fis-bony thorax. This bony and cartilaginous frame provides pro-sure, and therefore only two lobes, called the upper and lower tection and also movement of the thoracic cage to accom-lobes. You may hear the term lingula. This is an area of the modate breathing. The bony thorax includes the rib cage, left lung that corresponds with the right middle lobe. Why the sternum (or breastbone), and the corresponding thoracic only two lobes in the left, you may ask? Remember that the vertebrae to which the ribs attach (see FIGURE 14–13 ■).

heart is located in a space (cardiac impression) in the left The sternum is centrally located at the anterior portion anterior area of the chest and therefore takes up some space of the thoracic cage and is comprised of the manubrium, of the left lung. In fact, the right lung is larger, and about body, and xiphoid process. This anatomical landmark is very 60% of gas exchange occurs there. The lobes are even further important for proper hand placement in CPR (cardiopulmo-divided into specific segments related to their anatomical nary resuscitation). The hand is placed over the body of the M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 307

17/05/18 4:47 PM





308 Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions: An Interactive Journey Lung bronchopulmonary segments (anterior view) Apical

Anterior

Superior

lingular

Lateral

Medial

Inferior

lingular

Anterior basal

Medial basal

Posterior basal

Right lung

Left lung

Apical

Fused

and

into

Apical

posterior

single

element

Superior

Posterior

Anterior

Superior

Anterior

Superior

Lingular

Lateral

Inferior

Middle

Medial

Superior

Superior

Anterior basal

Anterior basal

Medial basal

Inferior

Medial basal

Inferior

Lateral basal

Lateral basal

Segmental (tertiary) bronchi

Posterior basal

Posterior basal

Lung bronchopulmonary segments (posterior view) Apical

Posterior

Superior

Posterior

basal

Lateral

basal

Left lung

Right lung

FIGURE 14–12 ■

Bronchopulmonary segments.

sternum where compressions squeeze the heart between the 1 through 7 and are called vertebrosternal because they con-body of the sternum and the thoracic vertebrae. If the hand nect anteriorly to the sternum and posteriorly to the thoracic placement is too low on the xiphoid process, it can break off vertebrae of the spinal column. Pairs 8, 9, and 10 are called and lacerate the internal organs.

the false ribs, or vertebrocostal, because they connect to the The thoracic cage consists of 12 pairs of elastic arches of costal cartilage of the superior rib and again posterior to the bone called ribs. The ribs are attached by cartilage to allow thoracic vertebrae. Rib pairs 11 and 12 are called the floating for their movement while breathing. The true ribs are pairs ribs because they have no anterior attachment.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 308

17/05/18 4:47 PM





CHAPTER 14 • The Respiratory System 309

Manubrium

True

ribs

(7 pairs)

Body

Sternum

Ribs

(12 pairs)

Xiphoid

process

False

Costal

ribs

cartilage

(3 pairs)

Floating ribs (2 pairs)

FIGURE 14–13 ■

The thoracic cage.

HOW WE BREATHE

the spinal cord. The diaphragm contracts and flattens, The control center that tells us to breathe is located in the thereby increasing the space in the thoracic cavity (see brain, specifically in the medulla oblongata. There is also FIGURE 14–14 ■). The increase in volume in the thoracic another respiratory area in the pons. Inspiration is an active cavity causes a decrease in pressure in the thoracic cavity that process of ventilation in which the main breathing muscle, is transmitted to the lungs. Keep in mind that volume and the diaphragm (a dome-shaped muscle when at rest), is sent pressure are inversely related. Because the pressure in the a signal via the phrenic nerve, from the cervical plexus of lungs is now lower than atmospheric pressure, air rushes into Medulla

Ribs rise on

oblongata

inhalation

Phrenic nerve

stimulation

Diaphragm contracts and

Diaphragm relaxes

During inhalation the diaphragm

During exhalation the diaphragm

flattens during inhalation,

during exhalation,

presses the abdominal organs

rises and recoils to the resting

air rushes in

air is pushed out

forward and downward

position

FIGURE 14–14 ■

How we breathe.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 309

17/05/18 4:47 PM

310 Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions: An Interactive Journey the lungs, down the pressure gradient (from high to low).

becomes clinically significant when assessing people who The external intercostal muscles also assist by moving the have fibrotic diseases of the lung that decrease compliance ribs up and outward during inspiration to increase the total and make it difficult to breathe in a sufficient volume of air.

volume in the thoracic cavity.

What makes the brain tell the lungs how rapidly or how Exhalation, on the other hand, is usually a passive act. As slowly to breathe? Although we can consciously speed up or the diaphragm relaxes, it forms a dome shape, which decreases slow down our breathing, our breathing rate is normally con-the amount of space in the thoracic cavity. As a result, pres-trolled by the level of carbon dioxide in our blood. If blood sure in the lungs becomes greater than the atmospheric pres-carbon dioxide levels rise, it means that not enough CO2 is sure, and the air is pushed out of the lungs. The fact that the being ventilated, so the medulla oblongata sends signals to the lungs are elastic and are stretched during inspiration also respiratory muscles to increase the rate and depth of breath-aids in expiration because this tissue returns to rest (recoils), ing. Sensory receptors in the aorta and carotid arteries and much as a stretched rubber band that is released.

the medulla oblongata constantly monitor blood chemistry.

The ease by which ventilation occurs is referred to as These chemoreceptors actually sense blood pH. As CO2 levels compliance. Low compliance means that it is more difficult rise, blood pH falls, as the blood becomes more acidic. So any to expand the lungs, whereas high compliance means that time blood becomes more acidic, say in untreated diabetes, less effort is required to expand the lungs. For example, this the ventilation rate will increase to “blow off” excess CO2.

A M A Z I N G F A C T S

Exhaled CO2 and Mosquitoes

Mosquitoes are too small to carry flashlights, so how do have greater bacterial colonies, seem to be targeted more they find you in the dark? They do it by using carbon so than other parts of the body. Finally, pregnant women dioxide sensors to locate increased concentrations of CO2

are twice as likely to be bitten because they exhale about emitted by—you guessed it—your exhaled breath. Once 21% more carbon dioxide and their body temperature is they detect your exhaled CO2 (which can be up to 164

approximately 1.26°F warmer than normal.

feet away), they use their heat sensors to find an area Another amazing carbon dioxide fact is that many of skin on which to begin their banquet. You have an people believe swimmers hyperventilate to get more oxy-increased chance of being bitten during and right after gen in their systems before a sustained underwater dive.

exercising or doing any strenuous labor. This is because In reality, they are “blowing off” CO2 to get their levels low.

increases of lactic acid and body heat when you are Because higher levels of CO2 cause us to want to breathe, active appear to attract mosquitoes, as does an increase the body is fooled into believing it doesn’t need to for a in uric acid. Also, if you have blood type O, you are twice while longer, so swimmers can remain underwater longer.

as likely to get bitten as a person with blood type A (type Unfortunately, the body still uses up its oxygen at a regu-B is somewhere in the middle). Certain skin bacteria also lar rate and sometimes uses enough of the reserve that attract mosquitoes; this is why your ankles and feet, which swimmers risk losing consciousness.

Sometimes the body needs help to breathe beyond resting need to be assisted. Again, the body has accessory muscles or normal breathing. For example, during increased physical of exhalation that assist in a more forceful and active exhala-activity or in disease states in which more oxygen is required, tion by increasing abdominal pressure. The main accessory accessory muscles are used to help pull up your rib cage to muscles of exhalation are the various abdominal muscles that make an even larger space in the thoracic cavity. The acces-push up the diaphragm or the back muscles that pull down sory muscles used are the scalene and the sternocleidomastoid and thus compress the thoracic cage. The next time you blow muscles in the neck and the pectoralis major and pectoralis a candle, put your hand on your abdomen. You will feel the minor muscles of the chest.

abdominal muscles tighten to increase the force of expiration Although exhalation is a passive process, there are times, to blow out the candle. See FIGURE 14–15 ■ for the specific especially with certain disease states, when exhalation may accessory muscles of exhalation.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 310

17/05/18 4:47 PM



CHAPTER 14 • The Respiratory System 311

Bronchial

gas flow

Diaphragmatic

Rectus

External

Internal

Transversus

pressure

abdominis

oblique

oblique

abdominis

FIGURE 14–15 ■

The accessory muscles of exhalation.

Pulmonary Function Testing

• Residual volume (RV)—the volume of air remaining Lung function can be measured in terms of volumes and flows in the lungs after a maximum expiration

using pulmonary function testing (PFT). First, the various

• Vital capacity (VC)—the maximum amount of air volumes can be measured by having the patient breathe nor-that can be moved into and out of the respiratory mally and then take a maximum deep breath followed by a system in a single respiratory cycle.

maximum exhalation. The tracing of this breath is recorded

• Total Lung Capacity (TLC)—the sum of all the lung as in

volumes

FIGURE 14–16 ■. For example, tidal volume (VT) is the amount of air moved into or out of the lungs at rest during a Besides volumes and capacities, we can also measure the single breath. The normal tidal volume is 500 mL, although flow rates coming out of the lung at various points during there is considerable variation depending on age, sex, height, a forced (maximum patient effort) vital capacity (FVC). For and general fitness. Your inspiratory reserve volume is what example, we can measure the forced expiratory volume in you can breathe in beyond a normal inspiration. Likewise, 1 second, or FEV

your expiratory reserve volume is what you can exhale beyond 1. Normally, one can exhale 75–85% of

their FVC in 1 second. However, someone with an obstruc-a normal exhalation. You can never totally exhale all the air tive disease would take longer to exhale and get less than out of your lungs; your residual volume (RV) prevents total 70% of their total FVC out in 1 second and therefore have a lung collapse. We can combine these volumes to get various reduced FEV

lung capacities, as shown in Figure 14–16 and below.

1.

Another test that helps establish whether the airways

• Function residual capacity (FRC)—the volume of have become “narrower” than normal (as would be seen in air remaining in the lungs at the end of a normal an asthma episode) is peak expiratory flow rate, or PEFR, expiration

which is the maximum flow rate or speed of air a person can

• Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV)—the amount of rapidly expel after taking the deepest possible breath. The air that can be forcefully inhaled beyond a normal PEFR test is measured in liters per minute and should be inspiration

within a predicted range. This a good test to reflect how the

• Expiratory reserve volume (ERV)—the amount of air larger airways are functioning and to monitor diseases such that can be forcefully exhaled beyond a normal expiration as asthma that affect these airways.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 311

17/05/18 4:47 PM



312 Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions: An Interactive Journey (VC) (TLC)

(IC)

Inspiratory

Reserve Volume

(IRV)

IRV

Inspiratory Capacity

Vital Capacity

Tidal Volume (VT)

VT

(FRC)

Expiratory Reserve

Total Lung Capacity

Volume (ERV)

ERV

Residual Volume

RV

Functional Residual Capacity

(RV)

Lung volume measurements

Male (in milliliters) Female (in milliliters) Tidal Volume (VT): The volume of gas in and out of the lungs during one normal breath 500

400–500

Inspiratory Reserve Volume (IRV):

The volume of air forcefully inspired beyond 3100

1900

a normal inspiration

Expiratory Reserve Volume (ERV):





Volume of gas forcefully exhaled beyond


1200


800

a normal expiration

Residual Volume (RV): The volume of gas still remaining in the lungs after a forced expiration 1200

1100

Lung Capacities

(combination of two or more volumes)

Vital Capacity (VC):

VC = IRV + VT + ERV

4800

3200

Inspiratory Capacity (IC):

IC = VT + IRV

3600

2400

Functional Residual Capacity (FRC):

2400

1800

FRC = ERV + RV

Total Lung Capacity (TLC):

TLC = IRV + VT + ERV + RV

6000

4200

FIGURE 14–16 ■

Normal lung volumes and capacities.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 312

17/05/18 4:47 PM



CHAPTER 14 • The Respiratory System 313

T E S T Y O U R K N O W L E D G E 1 4 – 4

Choose the best answer.

Complete the following.

1. The _______________ pleura lines the thoracic cavity.

6. The process of producing red blood cells is called a. visceral

c. mediastinum

_______________.

b. parietal

d. chest

Match the following.

2. The portion of the sternum where CPR is performed 1. Function residual capacity

a. the maximum

is the:

(FRC) ___

amount of air that

a. xiphoid process.

c. manubrium.

2. Inspiratory reserve volume

can be moved into

b. ribs.

d. body.

(IRV) ___

and out of the respi-

3. Expiratory reserve volume

ratory system in a

3. The _______________ nerve innervates the main breath-

(ERV) ___

single respiratory

ing muscle, called the _______________.

4. Residual volume (RV) ___

cycle

a. thoracic; internal intercostals

5. Vital capacity (VC) ___

b. the volume of air

b. thoracic; diaphragm

remaining in the

c. phrenic; external intercostals

lungs at the end of a

d. phrenic; diaphragm

normal expiration

4. The amount of air moved during typical resting ventila-c. the amount of air

tion is called:

that can be forcefully

a. inspiratory reserve volume.

inhaled after a normal

b. vital capacity.

inspiration

c. expiratory reserve volume.

d. the amount of air

d. tidal volume.

that can be forcefully

exhaled after a nor-

5. As CO

mal expiration

2 rises, chemoreceptors send signals to the _______________ to _______________ ventilation.

e. the volume of air

a. cerebrum; decrease

remaining in the

b. heart; increase

lungs after a maxi-

c. medulla oblongata; increase

mum expiration

d. spinal cord; decrease

COMMON DISORDERS

makes deep breathing painful. Taking periodic deep breaths OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

is important not only to expand the lungs but also to stimu-Respiratory disease is one of the most common disease groups late the production of surfactant, which helps keep the small seen in health care settings. The following sections is a review alveolar sacs open between breaths.

of some of these.

Patients with large amounts of secretions who cannot cough them up are also at risk for atelectasis because the secretions block airways and lead to areas of collapse. Quite Atelectasis and Pneumonia

often, if atelectasis is not corrected and secretions are retained, Atelectasis, commonly occurring in hospitalized patients, pneumonia can develop within 72 hours. Pneumonia is a lung is a condition in which the air sacs of the lungs are either infection that can be caused by either viruses, fungi, protists, partially or totally collapsed. Atelectasis usually occurs in or bacteria. Inflammation occurs in the infected areas, with patients who cannot or will not take deep breaths to fully an accumulation of cell debris and fluid. In certain pneumo-expand the lungs and keep the passageways open. Surgery nias, lung tissue is destroyed. Pneumonias, if severe enough, or an injury of the thoracic cage (such as broken ribs) often can lead to death.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 313

17/05/18 4:47 PM





314 Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions: An Interactive Journey Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease the lungs is known as gas trapping. As a result of gas trapping, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a group of fresh air cannot get into the lungs, so the victim breathes the diseases in which patients have difficulty getting all the air same air over and over. This lowers the amount of oxygen in the out of their lungs. Often, large amounts of secretions and blood and increases the blood levels of carbon dioxide. Because lung damage are involved. The diseases involved in COPD

this is an inflammatory process of the airways, there is also are emphysema and chronic bronchitis. Asthma, formerly con-an increase in the amount of mucus that the airways produce.

sidered a COPD-type disease, is now separated into its own These increased secretions can block the airways (a phenomenon category due to its special characteristics such as its revers-known as mucus plugging) and further reduce the flow of fresh air ibility with proper treatment.

to the lungs. Although asthma can be a life-threatening disease, it can be controlled with the use of medication.

Asthma

Asthma is a potentially life-threatening lung condition in Emphysema

which the body reacts to an allergy by causing constriction Emphysema is a nonreversible lung condition in which the of the airways of the lungs, known as bronchospasm (see alveolar air sacs are destroyed and the lung itself becomes FIGURE 14–17 ■). It is difficult to get air in and even more dif-

“floppy” (see Figure 14–17), much like a balloon that has ficult to get air out of the lungs. The inability to get air out of been inflated and deflated too many times. As the alveoli are Normal bronchiole

Constricted bronchiole

Asthma

attack

Contracted

smooth

muscle

Mucous membrane

Swollen

mucous

Smooth muscle

membrane

Excessive

mucus

secretion

Normal lung

Emphysema

FIGURE 14–17 ■

Asthma and emphysema.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 314

17/05/18 4:47 PM

CHAPTER 14 • The Respiratory System 315

destroyed, it becomes more difficult for gases to diffuse between which case it is known as empyema), lymphatic fluid (called the lungs and the blood. The lung tissue becomes fragile and a chylothorax), serum from the blood (called a hydrothorax), can easily rupture (much like a worn tire), causing air to escape or blood (called a hemothorax). Because fluids are affected by into the thoracic cavity and further inhibit gas exchange. This gravity, pleural effusions tend to move to the lowest point in causes a pneumothorax, which is discussed below.

the pleural space. If a pleural effusion is large enough, it can have the same effect as a large pneumothorax. It can restrict Chronic Bronchitis

the amount of expansion of a lung or lungs. Because less air can flow into and out of the lungs, the patient has to work Chronic bronchitis is a lung disease in which there are inflamed harder by breathing in and out more rapidly to meet the airways and large amounts of sputum are being produced. As body’s demands for more oxygen and the removal of carbon inflammation occurs, the airways swell, and the inner diameter dioxide. This additional work of breathing may exhaust an of the airways become smaller. As they get smaller, it becomes individual to the point that he or she can no longer breathe difficult to move air in and out, which increases the work of without intervention. These conditions may progress to breathing. Because of this increased work level, more oxygen atelectasis.

is used, and more carbon dioxide is produced.

Pneumothorax

Tuberculosis

A pneumothorax is a condition in which there is air inside Tuberculosis (TB) is a bacterial infection that has seen a recent the thoracic cavity and outside the lungs, often in the pleural rise in occurrence. It thrives in areas of the body that have cavity. Remember that the pleural cavity is a potential space.

high oxygen content such as the lung. Tuberculosis bacilli Gas or fluid may be forced into the cavity, separating the can remain dormant in the body for years before beginning layers of the membrane. Air can enter the thoracic cavity to multiply. If it continues unchecked, vast lung damage from two directions. A stab wound or gunshot wound to the can occur. There has been recent concern about a multidrug-chest would allow air to rush into the thoracic cavity from resistant form of tuberculosis that is very resistant to the the outside. The lung might develop a leak as a result of antibiotics that are normally used to treat TB, and this strain either a structural deformity or a disease process (such as in has a high mortality rate.

emphysema). In this situation, air would enter the thoracic Patients with lung disease may exhibit signs and symp-cavity from the lung as air is breathed in. In either case, if toms such as dyspnea, tachypnea, cyanosis due to low the gas cannot escape, it will continue to fill a space in the oxygen levels, and use of accessory muscles of ventilation thoracic cavity and provide less space for the lung or lungs to to assist normal breathing. In addition, the cardiac sys-expand when breathing. If the lungs are too greatly restricted tem may exhibit tachycardia to speed up oxygen delivery to expand, a life-threatening situation may occur.

and may increase the number of red blood cells that carry oxygen.

The major preventable cause of many respiratory diseases Pleural Effusion

is smoking. The annual number of smoking-related deaths in A pleural effusion is a condition in which an excessive the United States is equivalent to one jumbo jet filled with buildup of fluid develops in the pleural cavity between the passengers crashing every day with no survivors, or 450,000

parietal and the visceral pleura. This fluid may be pus (in deaths per year.

S U M M A R Y

Points of Interest

• The lungs contain continually branching airways called bronchi and bronchioles.

• Moving approximately 12,000 quarts of air each day, the respiratory system is responsible for providing oxygen for

• At the end of bronchioles are alveolar sacs.

the blood to take to the body’s tissues and removing carbon

• Each alveolar sac is surrounded by a capillary network dioxide, one of the waste products of cellular metabolism.

where gas exchange occurs with the blood.

• Ventilation is the movement of gases into and out of the

• The purpose of the upper airway is to filter, warm, and lungs; during respiration, oxygen is added to the blood moisten inhaled air for its journey to the lungs.

and carbon dioxide is removed.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 315

17/05/18 4:47 PM

316 Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions: An Interactive Journey

• In addition, the upper airway provides for olfaction (sense

• The tracheobronchial tree is like an upside-down tree with of smell) and phonation (speech).

ever-branching airways, where the trunk of the tree is rep-

• The mucociliary escalator captures foreign particles, resented by the trachea and the leaves by the alveoli.

and the hairlike cilia constantly move a layer of mucus up

• The alveolar capillary membrane is where external respirato the upper airway to be swallowed or expelled.

tion or gas exchange occurs.

• Adenoids and tonsils aid in preventing pathogens from

• The bony thorax provides support and protection for the entering the body.

respiratory system.

• Because activities of breathing and swallowing share

• The main muscle of breathing is the diaphragm, and a common pathway, the epiglottis protects the air-accessory muscles assist in times of need such as exercise way to the lungs from accidental aspiration of food and and disease.

liquids.

• The medulla oblongata in the brain is the control center

• Vocal cords are the gateway between the upper and lower for breathing and sends impulses via the phrenic nerve to airways.

the diaphragm.

C A S E S T U D Y

A patient comes to the emergency department with wheez-c. What would be some positive indicators that your ing and thick secretions. His heart rate, breathing rate, and treatment is working? For example, after the treat-blood pressure are all increased. He is using accessory muscles ment, you notice less accessory muscle use. Can you of ventilation to breathe and has peripheral cyanosis. He has a think of at least two more?

history of allergies and has had a “bad cold” for several days.

_________________________________________

a. What are two possible respiratory conditions he may _________________________________________

have?

_________________________________________

_________________________________________

b. Can you think of some recommended treatments for this patient?

_________________________________________

_________________________________________

R E V I E W Q U E S T I O N S

Multiple Choice

3. Which of the following is not a function of the upper airway?

1. The process of gas exchange between the alveolar area a. Humidification

and capillary is:

b. Gas exchange

a. external ventilation.

c. Filtration

b. internal ventilation.

d. Heating or cooling gases

c. internal respiration.

d. external respiration.

4. The largest cartilage in the upper airway is the: a. cricoid.

2. The bulk movement of gas into and out of the lung is b. eustachian.

called:

c. mega cartilage.

a. internal respiration.

d. thyroid.

b. ventilation.

c. diffusion.

d. gas exchange.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 316

17/05/18 4:47 PM

CHAPTER 14 • The Respiratory System 317

5. Which structure controls the opening to the trachea?

7. The lung capacity that includes tidal volume, inspiratory a. Esophagus

reserve volume, and expiratory reserve volume is called b. Hypoglottis

your:

c. Epiglottis

a. total lung capacity.

d. Hyperglottis

b. functional residual capacity.

c. inspiratory capacity.

6. Cells need oxygen to:

d. vital capacity.

a. make ATP.

b. get rid of CO2.

c. use gasoline.

d. breathe.

Matching

1.

_____ Asthma

a. An inherited disease transmitted by a recessive gene, causing excessive mucus production

2.

_____ Chronic bronchitis

b. Causes permanent destruction of alveolar walls and surrounding capillaries 3.

_____ Laryngitis

c. Has many triggers that include pet dander, food allergies, and cold air 4.

_____ Emphysema

d. Occurs when air sacs in the lungs are either partially or totally collapsed 5.

_____ Cystic fibrosis

e. Caused by bacteria or viruses and will affect your voice 6.

_____ Tuberculosis

f. Cigarette smoking causes large amounts of secretions and inflamed airways 7.

_____ Atelectasis

g. Caused by a bacterial infection that thrives in areas of the body that have high oxygen concentrations

Fill in the Blank

Short Answer

1. Small bronchi are called ______________.

1. Describe the tissue layers in the bronchi.

2. The sense of smell is termed ______________, and the _____________________________________________

act of speech is called ______________.

_____________________________________________

3. The hairlike projections called ______________ beat _____________________________________________

within the ______________ layer and propel the _____________________________________________

______________ layer toward the oral cavity to be 2. Explain how gas exchange takes place in the lungs.

expectorated.

_____________________________________________

4. The ______________ are thought to lighten the head _____________________________________________

and provide resonance for the voice.

_____________________________________________

5. When the diaphragm contracts, lung volume _____________________________________________

______________ and air flows ______________.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 317

17/05/18 4:47 PM

318 Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions: An Interactive Journey 3. Discuss the importance of surfactant.

5. Explain the changes in the wall of the tracheobronchial _____________________________________________

tree as you move from conducting zone to respiratory zone.

_____________________________________________

_____________________________________________

_____________________________________________

_____________________________________________

_____________________________________________

_____________________________________________

4. Describe the process of normal breathing beginning with _____________________________________________

the brain.

_____________________________________________

_____________________________________________

_____________________________________________

_____________________________________________

Visit our new MyLab Health Professions to accompany Anatomy & Physiology for Health Professions, 4th Ed., where you’ll be able to enhance your study and application through quizzes, case studies, labeling exercises, dynamic study modules, speak & spell activities, flash cards, and animations.

Don’t have access? Ask your instructor for details.

M14_COLB6818_04_SE_C14.indd 318

17/05/18 4:47 PM





