11:10 am, Feb 25, 2008

Entire PDF

Audio File

In Real Media

Format

The Muscular System

© Jim Swan

1

These slides are from class presentations, reformatted for static viewing. The content contained in these pages is also in the Class Notes pages in a narrative format. Best screen resolution for viewing is 1024 x 768. To change resolution click on start, then control panel, then display, then settings. If you are viewing this in Adobe Reader version 7 and are connected to the internet you will also be able to access the “enriched” links to notes and comments, as well as web pages including animations and videos.

You will also be able to make your own notes and comments on the pages. Download the free reader from [Adobe.com]

1



3 Types of Muscle Tissue

Muscle Type

Location

Characteristics

Control

Attached to the

Long, cynlindrical

Skeletal

cells;

Voluntary

bones for

multinucleated,

movement

striated

Short, branching cells,

Cardiac

Involuntary

Muscle of the

mononucleated, faintly

Heart

striated. Forms

myogenic

functional syncytia.

Smooth

Single Unit: GI,

Involuntary

Muscle

Respiratory, &

Small oblong cells,

Genitourinary tract

mononucleated,

myogenic

mucous membranes.

also may form a

Multi-unit: smooth

functional

muscle in blood

syncytium.

2

vessel walls.

2





Skeletal Muscle

nuclei

Connective

endomysium

separates cells.

Striations =

dark bands

Myofibrils fill

sarcoplasm

3

The nuclei and other organelles of skeletal muscle cells are found next to the sarcolemms and the majority of the sarcoplasm is filled with the contractile machinery of the cell, the myofibrils. Skeletal muscle cells are derived from individual myocytes which fuse to produce a mature multinucleated muscle fiber. There are few if any of the precursor myocytes found in a mature muscle, and so muscles produce no new cells after maturity. Individual cells respond to training by enlarging and building myofibrils and other components.

3





Skeletal Muscle photomicrographs

Dark striations = A-bands,

the light areas between

are the I-bands.

Z-line. From one Z

line to the next is a

sarcomere.

Z-line

The sarcolemma is the

cell membrane

4

4





Cardiac Muscle

Intercalated disks

Faint striations

Branching cells

connect to form

network.

mononucleated

The action potential travels through all cells connected together in a syncytium causing them to function as a unit.

5

Cardiac muscle cells are much shorter than cells in skeletal muscle and they branch to connect to neighboring cells through specialized membranes called intercalated disks to form a network called a syncytium.

5





Smooth Muscle

nucleus

Spindle -shaped mononucleated smooth muscle cell.

6

Smooth muscle cells connect to form single-unit syncytia similar to cardiac muscle. But impulses and contractions occur much more slowly in smooth than in cardiac muscle.

6





Smooth Muscle Arrangement

In the intestine smooth muscle forms two distinct layers, one running along, the other running around the organ.

Together these layers cause movements which propel the contents.

The circular layer runs around the intestine and its contraction causes segmentation The longitudinal layer runs along the 7

intestine; it causes wave-like contractions.

7



Types of Smooth Muscle Fibers

Single unit smooth muscle – cells connected to function as a single unit (syncytium) e.g. in GI tract

Multiunit smooth muscle – cells grouped into many contractile units controlled by the nervous system.

e.g. in blood vessel walls and sphincters in GI tract.

8

8





Structure of a Skeletal Muscle

Tendon attachment

Belly – contains cells

epimysium

Fibrous covering

perimysium

Surrounds fascicle

{

fascicle

Cell

(fiber)

endomysium

Figure 9.1

Surrounds cells (fibers)

9

The hierarchy of connective tissues associated with a skeletal muscle provide a continuous connection between muscle cells and their action on a bone or other attachment. At the same time cells are effectively separated from one another and each is controlled by a separate nerve fiber.

9



Functional Characteristics

of Skeletal Muscle

Excitability (responsiveness) – muscles can be stimulated by electrical, chemical, and physical means.

Contractility – a muscle responds to stimuli by contracting.

Elasticity – muscles tend to recoil to their resting length.

Extensibility – muscles can be stretched beyond their resting length.

11

11



Muscle Attachments

Tendons – attach muscle to bone.

Aponeuroses – broad, flat, tendinous attachment.

Origin – more fixed point of attachment.

Insertion – more movable point of attachment.

Muscle action pulls insertion toward the origin.

A muscle can only pull, it cannot push.

10

10



Types of Muscle Contractions

Agonist – the prime mover; the muscle which performs the movement in question.

Antagonist – the muscle that performs the opposing movement to that of the agonist.

Both muscles contract (exert tension) regardless of which is the agonist or antagonist.

On-center movement – that of the agonist Off-center (eccentric) movement – that of the antagonist 12

The antagonist may actually be stretching while it is generating tension (contracting).

12





Knee Extension

Agonist: the rectus femoris (quadriceps femoris) Antagonist: the biceps femoris (hamstrings) 13

13





Knee Flexion

Agonist: the biceps femoris (hamstrings) Antagonist: the rectus femoris (quadriceps femoris) 14

14



Synergists – muscles which work together to perform a movement; often differs from the movement either performs when working alone.

Fixators – muscles which work to keep a part from moving; stabilizers, neutralizers.

Assignment: make a list of 5 each antagonists, synergists, and fixators.

15

For each example you will need a couple of muscles: for antagonists you will need the two muscles which are antagonistic, for synergists the two or more muscles which work together, and for fixators the part of the body which is fixed and under what conditions.

15





A Muscle Cell

nucleus

= A Fiber

myofibril

striations

sarcolemma

{

I Band

Striation = A Band

Titin proteins

A sarcomere

myosin

actin

16

Look at the video clip showing muscle hierarchy. From the largest to

smallest the hierarchy is as follows: whole muscle is composed of bundles of cells called fasciculi, individual cells are composed of myofibrils, which are organized of myofilaments of actin and myosin and other proteins arranged in a specific way.

16





The Sarcomere

A-Band

I-Band

Z-disk

H-zone

{

Titin

Actin filaments

Myosin filaments

(thin bands)

(thick bands)

17

Titin proteins are part of the structural support for the myofilaments of the sarcomere and also a part of the “series elastic elements” along with other proteins and connective tissues.

17





ed

Click on the paper

elaxR

clip icons for

The Z-disks do

photo-micrographs

not actually

of the sarcomere at

change.



various degrees of

ly

shortening. Note

ial

how the I bands

tracted

art

n

disappear and, as a

P

co

result, the

sarcomere

darkens.

Fully

contracted

18

In the relaxed state you can see the resting-length overlap of actin and myosin fibers. Note how the actin myofilaments move together in the partially contracted muscle, and themselves overlap when fully contracted. As the muscle contracts the z-disk of the sarcomere move toward one another and the sarcomere shortens. The actin and myosin myofilaments themselves do not shorten, nor does the Z-disk, despite its appearance in this view which is an artifact from making the graphic.

18



The Sliding Filament Mechanism

of Muscle Contraction

The shortening of sarcomeres, and the resulting muscle contraction, is due to the sliding of the actin and myosin myofilaments against one another.

19

19





The Myosin Molecule

Tail

Heads

Figure 9.3

20

Each myosin molecule is actually composed of two “tails” and two

“heads”.

20





The Thick Filament

21

Myosin molecules are arranged into the thick filaments with their tails parallel and their heads projecting toward the adjacent actin filaments.

21





Thick and Thin Filaments in a

Sarcomere

Thin filament

H zone

Thick filament

Connections (crossbridge

Connections (crossbridge

attachments) can form

attachments) can form

betwe

betwe e

e n my

n my osi

osi n

n hea

hea d

d s a

s a n

n d

d

actin.

actin.

22

Myosin heads project toward the acting filaments, with the heads angled toward the Z-disks on each side of the sarcomere. In the center of the thick myofilaments the H zone is bare of heads, with myosin tails only.

22





The Thin Filament

Troponin complex

Tropomyosin

G Actin

Tropomyosin blocks the crossbridge attachment sites on actin.

Troponin shifts to move tropomyosin and expose the active sites.

23

Tropomyosin molecules wrap around the fibrous actin myofilaments blocking the active sites where myosin heads could attach. Troponin complexes hold the tropomyosin in position, and when stimulated by the presence of Ca+2 ions the troponin complex moves, causing tropomyosin to shift and expose the active sites.

23





Cross-Section at Troponin Complex

TnT = attaches to tropomyosin

TnC = binds calcium ions

TnI = shifts when Ca+2 binds

tropomyosin

Ca+2

24

Figure 9.6

1) Ca+2 binds to TnC

2) Troponin comlex shifts, moving tropomyosin, and exposing the active sites on actin.

3) Crossbridges attached from myosin heads to actin molecules.

24





Ca+2

Figure 9.7

25

1) In response to Ca+2 release into the sarcoplasm, the troponin-tropomyosin complex removes its block from actin, and the myosin heads immediately bind to active sites.

2) The myosin heads then swivel, the Working Stroke, pulling the Z-lines closer together and shortening the sarcomeres. As this occurs the products of ATP hydrolysis, ADP and Pi, are released.

3) ATP is taken up by the myosin heads as the crossbridges detach. If ATP is unavailable at this point the crossbridges cannot detach and release. Such a condition occurs in rigor mortis, the tensing seen in muscles after death, and in extreme forms of contracture in which muscle metabolism can no longer provide ATP.

4) ATP is hydrolyzed and the energy transferred to the myosin heads as they cock and reset for the next stimulus.

25





Neuromuscular Junction Flash Video The Neuromuscular Junction

Chemically-gated

Acetylcholine

Sodium Channel

Potassium

AcHE

Channel

Sodium-

K+

Na+

Potasium Pump

Ca++

Calcium channel

Basal lamina

Polarized

sarcolemma

+-

15

Na+ is pumped out, K+ in at 3:2 producing unequal distribution which leads to a polarized membrane, ~ -65mv.1) An impulse arrives at the neuromuscular junction causing Ca+2 to enter the axon terminus. 2) Ca+2 causes exocytosis of Ach vesicles into synaptic cleft. 3) Ach diffuses across the synapse to contact post-synaptic receptors on the sarcolemma. Ach causes Na+ to enter sarcolemma causing depolarization. 4) If depolarization is threshold a new impulse is produced on the sarcolemma by depolarization of voltage-regulated ion gates. 5) Sarcolemma repolarizes, K+ leaves the cell, pump restores distribution.6) Achase (a.k.a. ACh-E) breaks down Ach so the NMJ can function again.

See the next slide for illustrations.

15





Synaptic Blockers

chlinesterase inhibitors: cause paralysis by leading to blockage of receptors by ACh, e.g. insecticides and nerve gas.

The antidote to these toxins is atropine which blocks ACh.

Curare is an ACh competitor derived from plants, which has been used to relax muscles.

27

27





Neuromuscular Junction:

Motor neuron

Movement of impulse

(action potential)

Sarcolemma

28

Each skeletal muscle cell is stimulated by branches from a neuron’s axon.

28





The Axon Terminal at the Motor End Plate Axon terminal

Synaptic cleft

T tubule

myofibril

29

At each axon terminal is a motor end plate at which the neuromuscular junction occurs.

29





The Motor End Plate

Axon terminal

ACh

Synaptic cleft

ACh bound to

receptor opens

chemically-gated

ion channel.

30

The ACh receptor binds to a chemically-gated ion channel which opens due to contact with ACh.

30





Skeletal Muscle Impulse Conduction

T - tubules

Sarcoplasmic reticulum

myofibrils

31

Figure 9.4

The T-tubules and sarcoplasmic reticulum represent membranes which penetrate the sarcoplasm of the cell, taking the action potential to the inside.

31





Resting membrane potential

Figure 9.9

32

An action potential is produced when voltage-gated ion channels open in response to threshold depolarization, causing Na+ ions to rush into the cell.

32





Action potential:

Action potential:

••Self-propagated

Self-propagated

••All-or-none

All-or-none

Na

Na +

+ gate

gate s ope

s ope n a

n a tt

each location

each location

allowing Na

allowing Na +

+ in, then

in, then

K

K +

+ gates open to

gates open to

allow K

allow K +

+ out of the

out of the

cell causing

cell causing

repolarization.

repolarization.

33

The action potential is a self-propagated, all-or-none movement of depolarization along the membrane. All-or-none means that there are not different size action potentials. You either have one or you don't. As the action potential passes along the sarcolemma it causes release of Na+ into the cell by voltage-regulated ion gates, just as at the chemically-regulated gates when stimulated by ACH. Then K+ gates open to repolarize that section of the membrane. The opening of Na+

gates then K+ gates happens at each location along the sarcolemma to propagate the action potential.

33





3

2

Resting membrane potential

Voltage-gated ion

Voltage-gated ion

cha

cha n

n nels

nels : ope

: ope n in

n in

response to threshold

response to threshold

de

de polarization, allow

polarization, allow

Na

Na +

+ to rush into the

to rush into the

cell producing an

cell producing an

action potential

action potential

(impulse).

(impulse).

Threshold

Figure 9.9

34

depolarization

The resting membrane potential occurs because of the unequal distribution of sodium and potassium ions (a). An action potential is produced when voltage-gated ion channels open in response to threshold depolarization, causing Na+ ions to rush into the cell (b).

34





Propagation of the Action Potential

Na+ K+ Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

K+

K+

K+

K+

1)

1) Na

Na +

+ rushes in from depolarization

rushes in from depolarization

2)

2) Depolarization spreads to next set of Depolarization spreads to next set of gates.

gates.

3)

3) K

K +

+ rushe

rushe s

s out ca

out ca using repolarization

using repolarization

35

As the action potential passes along the sarcolemma it causes release of Na+ into the cell by voltage-regulated ion gates, just as at the chemically-regulated gates when stimulated by ACH. This depolarization spreads to the next set of gates causing them to open, and so forth all along the membrane. K+ gates open as the Na+ gates close to repolarize each section of the membrane. The opening of Na+

gates then K+ gates happens at each location along the sarcolemma to propagate the action potential.

35



Action Potential Flash Video

A } B }

3

The Action

+30

)

Potential

vm( lait 0netoP enarb 2

me

Threshold

M -55

5

Resting potential

-70

1 4

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

35

Time (ms)

The action potential is a self-propagated, all-or-none movement of depolarization along the membrane.All-or-none means that there are not different size action potentials. You either have one or you don't.

1) Depolarization speads from previous ion channel.

2)

When this depolarization reaches threshold, the Na+ channel opens, allowing Na+ ions into the cell and causing a reversal of potential.

3)

As the Na+ channels close, K+ channels open allowing K+ ions to leave the cell causing repolarization.

4)

Resting potential is reached, but so much K+ leaves the cell that there is a brief hyperpolarization

5)

The hyperpolarization ends as K+ channels close.

35





K+ Na+

37

The sequential opening of first sodium, then potassium, ion channels produces depolarization which spreads along the membrane as an action potential.

37





• Impulse travels along the sarcolemma.

38

As the action potential passes along the sarcolemma it enters the T-tubules which occur at each Z-line. (See Figure 9.4) The T-tubules are membranes which run across the cell (T for transverse) connecting to the sarcolemma. The T-tubules allow the action potential to continue into the cell interior.

38





• Impulse travels along the sarcolemma,

• enters the T-tubules.

39

At points along the T tubules they attach to the sarcoplasmic reticulum, a system of membrane channels inside the sarcoplasm.

39





• Impulse travels along the sarcolemma,

• enters the T-tubules,

• and triggers the release of Ca+2 from the S.R.

• Ca+2 pumped into the S.R. as crossbridges unattach.

Ca+2

Ca+2

Ca+2

40

When the action potential moves along the T tubules it causes the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release Ca+2 which is sequestered by the SR.

The SR pumps calcium like the sarcolemma pumps sodium and releases it into the sarcoplasm when stimulated by the action potential.

This causes the sliding of filaments as outlined earlier. The SR then pumps the Ca+2 back out of the sarcoplasm.

40





41

Here is shown Excitation-Contraction Coupling from the beginning to end, including each of the components examined previously.

41





Spinal cord

The Motor Unit

Motor neuron 1

Motor neuron 2

Motor unit = a group of muscl

Motor unit = a group of muscl e cells stimulated by e cells stimulated by the

the

same neur

same neur on.

on.

< 10 cells per motor unit =

< 10 cells per motor unit = ver ver y precise control e.g.

y precise control e.g.

extraocular

extraocular muscles

muscles

10 to 100 cells per unit = mo

10 to 100 cells per unit = mo st muscles, averag st muscles, averag e

e control

control

>100 cells per unit = gross movements, e.g. postural

>100 cells per unit = gross movements, e.g. postural 42

muscles

muscles

42





a)

b)

58

There are two ways in which a muscle can contract: isotonically and isometrically.

Isotonic contraction involves a shortening of the muscle as tension is generated, exhibited by diagram a) above, in which the muscle is moving a load. The tension remains constant as long as the load doesn’t change. Isotonic contractions are the majority of our muscular movements.

In b) above, the muscle cannot shorten but may increase its tension continuously against the force transducer. Isometric contractions are seen when a muscle generates tension against an immovable object.

Physiologically the contractions are identical. The heat produced by isotonic contractions is greater due to the action of movement of the internal myofilaments, but not significantly. Isotonic contractions provide a more complete workout of both the muscle and supportive systems such as the cardiovascular and respiratory.

Isometric contractions can be effective in building muscle tone and size.

We do not use the muscle twitch as part of our normal muscle responses.

Instead we use graded contractions, contractions of whole muscles which can vary in terms of their strength and degree of contraction. In fact, even relaxed muscles are constantly being stimulated to produce muscle tone, the minimal graded contraction possible. The above illustration shows how a muscle from a frog is used to produce graded contractions experimentally.

58





active

passive

43

The Muscle Twitch

Figure 9.12

The muscle twitch is a single response to a single stimulus. In a diagram of the muscle twitch can be seen the latent period, the period of a few ms encompassing the chemical and physical events preceding actual contraction. This is not the same as the absolute refractory period, the even briefer period when the sarcolemma is depolarized and cannot be stimulated. The relative refractory period occurs after this when the sarcolemma is briefly hyperpolarized and requires a greater than normal stimulus. [See Refractory Periods Diagram in Slide

#34] Following the latent period is the contraction phase in which the shortening of the sarcomeres and cells occurs. Then comes the relaxation phase, a longer period because it is passive, the result of recoil due to the series elastic elements of the muscle.

43





Fast twitch = 3 to 5 ms.

Intermediate = 10 to 20 ms.

Slow twitch = > 40 ms.

44

Twitch Lengths

Muscle twitches vary in length according to the type of muscle cells involved. Fast twitch muscles such as those which move the eyeball have twitches which reach maximum contraction in 3 to 5 ms (milliseconds). See [superior eye] and [lateral eye] These muscles were mentioned earlier as also having small numbers of cells in their motor units for precise control. The cells in slow twitch muscles like the postural muscles (e.g. back muscles, soleus) have twitches which reach maximum tension in 40 ms or so. The muscles which exhibit most of our body movements have intermediate twitch lengths of 10 to 20 ms.

These three types also represents different metabolic patterns as will be discussed later.

44



Quantal Summation (Recruitment)

Maximum response

Quantal Summation

Degree of muscle contraction

increases with increasing

stim ulus strength. More cells

are recruited with each increase

in stimulus strength, up to

Response

maxim um response at which

time all cells are contracting.

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

Stimulus Strength (volts)

46

Quantal Summation or Recruitment - this refers to increasing the number of cells contracting. This is done experimentally by increasing the voltage used to stimulate a muscle, thus reaching the thresholds of more and more cells. In the human body quantal summation is accomplished by the nervous system, stimulating increasing numbers of cells or motor units to increase the force of contraction.

46





Frequency Summation

Muscle is stimulated before it relaxes from the previous stimulus.

47

Figure 9.13

If you stimulate a muscle cell, or muscle, before it has relaxed from a previous stimulus, it will contract some more. This is called frequency summation.

47





Incomplete and Complete Tetanus

High frequency stimuli don’t permit the muscle to relax, producing a sustained contraction.

Tetanus = tetany = sustained contraction Wave Summation

Stimuli are all of the

same strength.

48

Wave Summation (a.k.a. frequency summation) and Tetanization- this results from stimulating a muscle cell before it has relaxed from a previous stimulus. This is possible because the contraction and relaxation phases are much longer than the refractory period. This causes the contractions to build on one another producing a wave pattern or, if the stimuli are high frequency, a sustained contraction called tetany or tetanus. (The term tetanus is also used for an illness caused by a bacterial toxin which causes contracture of the skeletal muscles.) This form of tetanus is perfectly normal and in fact is the way you maintain a sustained contraction.

48



Two Types of Summation

Quantal summation – the number of cells or motor units varies to produce contractions of different strengths.

a.k.a. recruitment

Frequency summation – a given set of cells or motor units increases the degree of contraction to produce a sustained contraction.

Wave summation or incomplete tetanus

Complete tetanus.

49

49





Example of Tetanus

n

tractionoC

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55

Stimuli per second

50

50





Treppe: Warmup

Figure 9.14

muscle cells initially stimulated when cold will exhibit muscle cells initially stimulated when cold will exhibit Stimuli are all of the same voltage.

gradually increasing responses until they have warmed gradually increasing responses until they have warmed 51

up.

up.

Treppe is not a way muscles exhibit graded contractions. It is a warmup phenomenon in which when muscle cells are initially stimulated when cold, they will exhibit gradually increasing responses until they have warmed up. The phenomenon is due to the increasing efficiency of the ion gates as they are repeatedly stimulated. Treppe can be differentiated from quantal summation because the strength of stimulus remains the same in treppe, but increases in quantal summation.

51





Length-Tension Relationship in a Sarcomere 52

Figure 9.21

Another way in which the tension of a muscle can vary is due to the length-tension relationship. This relationship expresses the characteristic that within about 10% the resting length of the muscle, the tension the muscle exerts is maximum. At lengths above or below this optimum length the tension decreases. In practical terms a muscle will be its strongest at midpoint in its extensibility. For the heart, you will later learn, it means the muscle will adjust its output to normal increases in blood supply.

52





Myofilament Overlap

Related to % of

Resting Length

53

Note how the overlap of actin and myosin is maximized near the resting length, and reduced when the sarcomere is fully contracted or fully stretched. The overlap of myosin and actin produces the ability to generate tension.

53



Length-Tension Relationship in a Muscle Optimum length for

maximum tension

Muscle

Tension

Muscle Length

54

The length-tension relationship is derived from the anatomy of the sarcomere, but it can be applied to the whole muscle as well. A muscle can exhibit its greatest tension within 10% of its resting length.

54





Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP)

“High Energy” bonds

55

Muscle cells, like all others, use ATP as their energy currency. During periods of rest ATP is built from ADP and Pi (inorganic phosphate), then during energy-requiring activities the ATP is hydrolyzed to release the energy for doing work, along with the ADP and Pi. But some muscle cells must exhibit activity levels in which they cannot make ATP as fast as it is consumed. So muscle cells have several mechanisms to provide the ATP they need.

55





Primary Energy for Muscle Contraction Energy for muscle

contraction

56

The phosphagen system - this is the use of immediately available ATP. This is not from stored ATP itself, muscle cells can store only very limited amounts. It is from energy stored as the related molecule CP, creatine phosphate. Creatine phosphate can be stored and is made from ATP during periods of rest. Then during periods of high activity CP

is broken down quickly and its energy converted to ATP. But this source of ATP can only supply a cell for 8 to 10 seconds during the most strenuous exercise. Creatine released during muscle activity shows up in the urine as creatinine, a combination of two creatine molecules.

56





The Phosphagen System

Used during the first 15

Used during the first 15

sec. of speed and

sec. of speed and

strength exercises.

strength exercises.

Creatinine

molecules released

during strenuous

exercise are

released as

creatinine in the

urine.

57

The phosphagen system - this is the use of immediately available ATP. This is not from stored ATP itself, muscle cells can store only very limited amounts. It is from energy stored as the related molecule CP, creatine phosphate. Creatine phosphate can be stored and is made from ATP during periods of rest. Then during periods of high activity CP

is broken down quickly and its energy converted to ATP. But this source of ATP can only supply a cell for 8 to 10 seconds during the most strenuous exercise. Creatine released during muscle activity shows up in the urine as creatinine, a combination of two creatine molecules.

57





Anerobic Glycolysis

58

Glycolysis is the initial way of utilizing glucose in all cells, and is used exclusively by certain cells to provide ATP when insufficient oxygen is available for aerobic metabolism. Glycolysis doesn't produce much ATP

in comparison to aerobic metabolism, but it has the advantage that it doesn't require oxygen. In addition, glycolysis occurs in the cytoplasm, not the mitochondria. So it is used by cells which are responsible for quick bursts of speed or strength. Like most chemical reactions, glycolysis slows down as its product, pyruvic acid, builds up. In order to extend glycolysis the pyruvic acid is converted to lactic acid in a process known as fermentation. Lactic acid itself eventually builds up, slowing metabolism and contributing to muscle fatigue.

58





Anerobic Glycolysis

Allows speed and

Allows speed and

strength fibers to

strength fibers to

perform for 1 to 1.5

perform for 1 to 1.5

minut

minut es.

es.

59

Eventually the lactic acid must be reconverted to pyruvic acid and metabolized aerobically, either in the muscle cell itself, or in the liver.

The oxygen which is "borrowed" by anaerobic glycolysis is called oxygen debt and must be paid back.

59



Oxygen Debt

.in 4

/m

e L

3

takp

Alactacid oxygen debt = 3.5 L

U

ercise

2

x

en

E

Extra oxygen from tissues and blood.

Extra oxygen from tissues and blood.

gyx 1

Lactic acid oxygen debt = 8.0 L

f O

Oxygen required to oxidize

Oxygen required to oxidize

0

ate o

the lactic acid produced.

4

8

12 16 20

the lactic acid produced.

24 28

32 36 40 44

R

Minutes

60

This graph shows the rate of oxygen uptake by the lungs during maximal exercise for 4 minutes and then for one hour after the exercise is over. This figure demonstrates the principle of oxygen debt. Oxygen debt is partly oxygen reserves in the lungs, tissues, and myoglobin in the lungs (alactacid oxygen debt). But mostly it is the amount of oxygen which will be required to metabolize the lactic acid produced, the lactic acid oxygen debt.

60





61

Ultimately, the product of glycolysis, pyruvic acid, must be metabolized aerobically. Aerobic metabolism is performed exclusively in the mitochondria. Pyruvic acid is converted to a molecule called an acetyl group and put into a pathway known as the Krebs Cycle. Energy is released in the form of ATP and, especially, as high energy electrons.

These high energy electrons are sent to a process within the mitochondria known as the electron transport system which produces the vast majority of the ATP. The waste products of aerobic metabolism are CO and H O. The reactant other than glucose is O .

2

2

2

61





Summary of Metabolic

Processes in Muscles:

The Phosphagen System

See [Facts About

Performance Boosters]

Figure 9.16 a

62

Training can increase the amount of creatine phosphate stored, but this alone does not increase the strength of a muscle, just the length of time before it runs out of CP, and that by only a few seconds. See [Facts About Performance Boosters]

62





Summary of Metabolic

Processes in Muscles:

Anerobic Glycolysis

Figure 9.16 b

63

Strength training increases the myofilaments in muscle cells and therefore the number of crossbridge attachments which can form.

Training does not increase the number of muscle cells in any real way. (Sometimes a cell will tear and split resulting in two cells when healed). Lactic acid removal by the cardiovascular system improves with training which increases the anaerobic capacity. Even so, the glycolysis-lactic acid system can produce ATP for active muscle cells for only about a minute and a half.

63





Summary of Metabolic

Processes in Muscles:

Aerobic Metabolism

Figure 9.16 c

64

Aerobic metabolism is used for endurance activities and has the distinct advantage that it can go on for hours. Aerobic training increases the length of endurance activities by increasing the number of mitochondria in the muscle cells, increasing the availability of enzymes, increasing the number of blood vessels, and increasing the amount of an oxygen-storing molecule called myoglobin.

64



Types of Muscle Fibers: White Fibers

Fast twitch

Large diameter, used for speed and strength.

Depends on the phosphagen system and on glycolysis-lactic acid.

Stores glycogen for conversion to glucose.

Fewer blood vessels.

Little or no myoglobin.

Training increases the number of myofibrils Training increases the number of myofibrils and, as a result, the muscle size.

and, as a result, the muscle size.

65

Different types of cells perform the differing functions of endurance activities and speed- strength activities. There are three types, red, white, and intermediate. The main differences can be exemplified by looking at red and white fibers and remembering that intermediate fibers have properties of the other two.

65



Red Fibers

Slow twitch

Small diameter, used for endurance.

Depends on aerobic metabolism.

Utilize fats as well as glucose.

Little glycogen storage.

Many blood vessels and much myoglobin give this muscle its reddish appearance.

Training increases the number of mitochondria and Training increases the number of mitochondria and enzymes for aerobic metabolism. Also increases enzymes for aerobic metabolism. Also increases cardiovascular and respiratory capacity.

66

cardiovascular and respiratory capacity.

Intermediate Fibers: sometimes called "fast twitch red", these fibers have faster action but rely more on aerobic metabolism and have more endurance. Most muscles are mixtures of the different types. Muscle fiber types and their relative abundance cannot be varied by training, although there is some evidence that prior to maturation of the muscular system the emphasis on certain activities can influence their development.

66



Energy Systems Used in Various S ports Pathways Used

Phosphagen System, almost entirely: 4 M ATP/Min

100 meter dash

for 8 to 10 Sec.

jumping

in Various

weight lifting

diving

football dashes

Activities

Phosphagen and Glycogen-lactic Acid systems: 200 meter dash

basketball

baseball home run

ice hockey dashes

Glycogen-lactic Acid System, mainly 2.5 M ATP/Min 400 meter dash

for 1.3 to 1.6 Min.

100 meter swim

tennis

soccer

Glycogen-lactic Acid System and Aerobic System 800 meter dash

200 meter swim

1500 meter run

boxing

2000 meter rowing

1500 meter run

1 mile run

400 meter swim

Aerobic System:

10,000 meter skating

cross-country skiing

marathon run

jogging

67

67



In exercise, high

100

carbohydrate diets

High Carb Diet lead to longer

sustained

performance

e 75

M

before exhaustion

ix

sets in.

sag

ed Die

50

t

rate Udyh

High Fat

o 25

Diet

Exhaustion

arb

C%

0

10 20 40

2 4

1

2

3

4

Sec. Min. Hours

68

Effect of duration and type of diet on relative percentages of carbohydrate or fat used for muscle energy. Percentage carbohydrate used is proportional to glycogen reserves and inversely proportional to fat usage.

68



2 hours of

Recovery vs. Diet

High carbohydrate diets lead to quicker recovery of muscle glycogen than do

exercise

other diets.

24

High carbohydrate

g

diet

/k 20

g

m 16

eng 12

coly

Fat & protein diet

8

scle g

4

No food

uM

0

20 30 40

50

5 days

0

10

Hours of Recovery

69

Effect of diet on the rate of muscle glycogen replenishment after prolonged exercise. This study compares athletes who have had a high carb diet with those who have had high fat & protein diets and with those who have fasted.

69





