COMPILED BY HOWIE BAUM

1

OUTLINE AND SCHEDULE - “YOUR AMAZING HUMAN BODY”

MODERATOR: Howie Baum

WEEK 1

A. Introduction to the class

B. Anatomy and Physiology

C. Levels of organization of the Human Body D. Characteristics and Maintenance of Life E. Homeostasis and Feedback

F. Body Cavities, Membranes, and the 11 Body / Organ Systems G. Diagnostic Imaging techniques and the different types of microscopes and devices for studying the body 2

WEEK 2

➢ Introductory Chemistry about the atoms and molecules in the body

➢ The importance of Minerals, Vitamins, and Trace mineral elements for the body

WEEK 3

➢ Cells and Tissues

➢ Circulatory System

WEEK 4

➢ Endocrine System

➢ Digestive System

WEEK 5

➢ Immune System

➢ Muscular System

3

WEEK 6

➢ Nervous System

➢ Integumentary System

WEEK 7

➢ Urinary System

➢ Respiratory System

WEEK 8

➢ Skeletal System/ Joints

➢ Reproductive Systems – Female and Male 4

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE HUMAN BODY

➢ The number of humans in the world now is 7.53 billion (7, 530,000,000) !!

➢ More than 250 babies are born every minute, while 150,000 people die daily, with the population increasing by almost three humans per second.

➢ Each of us lives, thinks, worries, and daydreams with, and within, that most complex and marvelous of possessions – a human body !!

➢ The body is a series of 11 integrated systems. Each system carries out one major role or task.

➢ The systems are, in turn, composed of main parts known as organs, the organs consist of tissues, and tissues are made up of cells.

5

Anatomy and Physiology A) Anatomy deals with the structure of the body and its parts; in other words, the names of the parts.

Pictures of the inside of the body are often shown in isolation, using techniques such as cutaways, cross-sections, and “exploded”

views, which provide clarity and understanding.

But in reality, the inside of the body is a crowded place.

Tissues and organs push and press against one another. There is no free space, and no stillness either. Body parts shift continually in relation to each other, as we move about, breathe, sleep, and eat.

B) Physiology studies the functions of these parts or asks the question, “how do they work?”

The two disciplines are closely interrelated because the functional role of a part depends on how it is made.

6

Levels of Organization of the Body The human body is the sum of its parts and these parts can be studied at a variety of levels of organization.

1. Chemicals:

a. Atoms are the simplest level.

b. Two or more atoms comprise a molecule.

c. Macromolecules are large, biologically important molecules inside cells.

2. Organelles are groups of macro-molecules used to carry out a specific function in the cell.

7

Levels of organization of the Body 3. Cells are the basic units of structure and function for living things.

4. Tissues are groups of cells functioning together.

5. Groups of tissues form organs that have specialized functions.

6. Groups of organs function together as an organ system.

7. The 11 Body (Organ) systems functioning together, to make up an organism.

8





Carbon atom

DNA

Chemical

molecule

organelle

cell

LEVELS OF ORGANIZATION

OF THE BODY

tissue

organism

organ

system

organ

CHARACTERISTICS OF LIFE

Fundamental characteristics of life are traits shared by all organisms.

1. Movement – change in position of the body or a body part; motion of an internal organ

2. Responsiveness – reaction to internal or external change

3. Growth – increase in size without change in shape 4. Reproduction – new organisms or new cells 5. Respiration – use of oxygen; removal of Carbon Dioxide

6. Digestion – breakdown of food into simpler forms

7. Absorption – movement of substances through membranes and into fluids

8. Circulation – movement within body fluids 9. Assimilation – changing nutrients into chemically different forms

10. Excretion – removal of metabolic wastes Taken together, these 10 characteristics constitute our metabolism – the physical and chemical events that obtain, release, and use energy.

11





What Are the Main Characteristics of organisms?

1. Made of CELLS

2. Require ENERGY (food)

3. REPRODUCE (species)

4. Maintain HOMEOSTASIS (keeping the body systems in balance)

5. ORGANIZED

6. RESPOND to environment

7. GROW and DEVELOP

8. EXCHANGE materials with their surroundings (water, wastes, gases)

12

MAINTENANCE OF LIFE

Life depends on the availability of the following: A) WATER

1) The most abundant chemical in the body 2) Required for many metabolic processes 3) Transportation of cells and body materials 4) Regulates body temperature

5) Makes up intracellular and extracellular fluid compartments

13



14

1. Maintenance of life - ( Continued) B) FOOD

1) Provides the body with needed nutrients 2) Needed for energy, raw building materials for growth and repair, and to regulate chemical reactions

b. Oxygen – releases energy from food c. Heat – product of metabolic reactions and muscle movement that controls and maintains the body temperature

15

1. Maintenance of life - (continued) C) PRESSURE

1) Force applied to something

2) Atmospheric pressure is needed for breathing 3) Hydrostatic (water) pressure is needed to move blood through blood vessels – our blood pressure

2. Both the quality and quantity of these factors are important

16

HOMEOSTASIS

All organisms must maintain a constant internal environment to function properly

• Temperature

• pH (acidic or basic)

• Salinity (salt level)

• Fluid levels

HOMEOSTASIS

1. Maintenance of a stable internal environment of the body is called homeostasis.

2. Homeostasis is regulated through control systems which have receptors (sensors), a set point, and effectors in common.

a. Receptors are of many types whose job is to monitor for changes

b. The set point is the normal value or range of values

c. Effectors are muscles or glands that respond to the changes to return to stability 18

3. Examples include: a. Homeostatic mechanisms regulate body temperature in a manner similar to the functioning of a home heating/cooling thermostat.

b. Another homeostatic mechanism employs pressure-sensitive receptors to regulate blood pressure

4. Each individual uses homeostatic mechanisms to keep body levels within a normal range; normal ranges can vary from one individual to the next.

19

5. Many of the body's homeostatic controls are negative feedback mechanisms.

a. Responses move in the opposite direction from the change

b. Reduces the amount of change from the set point c. Includes most control mechanisms in the body 20



Fig 1.6

21





Fig 1.7

22

6. Positive feedback mechanisms a. Response moves further from the set point b. Change from set point gets larger c. Many positive feedback mechanisms produce unstable conditions in the body which eventually go back to normal.

d. Examples associated with normal health 1) Blood clotting

2) Birth

23



24



ORGANIZATION OF THE BODY – BODY CAVITIES

1. Body Cavities - A body cavity is a space created in an organism

which houses organs.

2. It is lined with a layer of cells and is filled with fluid, to protect the organs from damage as the organism moves around.

3. Body cavities form during development, as solid masses of tissue

fold inward on themselves, creating pockets in which the organs develop.

4. An example of a body cavity in humans would be the cranial cavity, which houses the brain.

25



THE HUMAN BODY HAS TWO MAIN BODY CAVITIES

The first, the ventral cavity, is a large cavity which sits ventrally to the spine and includes all the organs from your pelvis to your throat.

The first subdivision is the diaphragm muscle, which divides the abdomino-pelvic cavity from the thoracic cavity. This can be seen in the image below.

26





The abdomino-pelvic cavity is

then further subdivided into the

pelvic cavity and the abdominal

cavity.

The abdominal cavity is where

the majority of the body’s

organs lie. These are

sometimes referred to as the

“viscera”, and they include

organs like the liver, stomach,

spleen, pancreas, kidneys and

others involved in digestion,

metabolism, and filtering of the

blood.

The pelvic cavity holds the

reproductive organs, bladder,

and allows the intestines

passage to the anus

A special membrane holds all of

these organs in place and is

called the peritoneum.

27



Smaller cavities

within the head

include the oral

cavity, nasal

cavity, orbital

cavities (eye

sockets) , and

middle ear

cavities

28



THE 11 BODY (ORGAN)

SYSTEMS

29



When groups of tissues work together, they are called organs. Some examples of organs are the heart, lungs, skin, and stomach.

When organs work together, they are called systems and each one depends, directly or indirectly, on all of the others..

The 11 organ systems of the body are:

❖ Integumentary (skin)

❖ Muscular

❖ Skeletal

❖ Nervous

❖ Circulatory

❖ Lymphatic,

❖ Respiratory

❖ Endocrine

❖ Urinary/Excretory

❖ Reproductive

❖ Digestive.

30

All of your body systems have to work together to keep you healthy. If any system in your body isn't working properly, other systems are affected

❖ Your bones and muscles work together to support and move your body.

❖ Your respiratory system takes in oxygen from the air and gets rid of carbon dioxide.

❖ Your digestive system absorbs water and nutrients from the food you eat.

❖ Your circulatory system carries oxygen, water, and nutrients to cells throughout your body.

❖ Wastes from the cells are eliminated by your respiratory system, excretory system, and skin.

❖ Your nervous system controls all these activities with electrical impulses..

31





33



1) INTEGUMENTARY SYSTEM

(SKIN)

Forms the external body

covering and protects deeper

tissues from injury.

Synthesizes vitamin D, and

contains cutaneous (pain,

pressure, etc.) receptors and

sweat and oil glands.

34



2. Support and Movement

(2 Parts)

A) The skeletal system is

made up of bones and

ligaments.

It supports, protects,

provides frameworks,

stores inorganic salts, and

houses blood-forming

tissues.

35



B) The muscular

system consists of

the muscles that

provide body

movement, posture,

and body heat.

36



3. Integration and

Coordination (2 parts)

A) The nervous

system consists of

the brain, spinal

cord, nerves, and

sense organs.

It integrates

incoming information

from receptors and

sends impulses to

muscles and glands.

37



B) The endocrine

system, includes the

hypothalamus, pituitary,

thyroid, parathyroid,

pineal, and thymus

glands, pancreas,

ovaries, and testes,

along with other organs

that secrete hormones.

It helps to integrate

metabolic functions.

38



4. Transport (2 parts)

A) The cardiovascular

system, is made up of

the heart and blood

vessels.

It distributes oxygen,

nutrients, and hormones

throughout the body

while removing wastes

from the cells.

39



B) The lymphatic

system, consists of

lymphatic vessels,

lymph nodes, thymus,

and spleen.

It drains excess tissue

fluid and includes cells

of immunity.

40



5. Absorption and Excretion

(3 parts)

A) The digestive system is

made up of the mouth,

esophagus, stomach,

intestines, and accessory

organs.

It receives, breaks down, and

absorbs nutrients.

41



B) The Respiratory system

exchanges Oxygen and Carbon

Dioxide between the blood and

air and is made up of the lungs

and passageways.

42



C) The Urinary

system, consists of

the kidneys, ureters,

bladder, and urethra.

It removes wastes

from the blood and

helps to maintain

water and electrolyte

balance.

43



6) The Reproductive system

produces new organisms.

A) The male reproductive system

consists of the testes, penis,

accessory organs, and vessels

that produce and conduct sperm

to the female reproductive tract.

B) The female reproductive

system consists of ovaries,

uterine tubes, uterus, vagina,

and external genitalia.

She produces egg cells and also

houses the developing baby.

5 minute video

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ae4MadKPJ

C0

44



45



46



WHAT IS YOUR BODY TYPE ?

47



Diagnostic Imaging

Techniques and Microscopy

methods





What is Diagnostic Imaging?

Diagnostic imaging

refers to technologies

that doctors use to

look inside your body

for clues about a

medical condition.

Different machines

and techniques can

create pictures of the

structures and

activities inside your

body.

They are great

because they are

not invasive.

TYPES OF DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING

1. The technology your doctor uses will depend on your symptoms and the part of your body being examined.

2. Types of diagnostic imaging include:

❖

X-rays

❖

CT scans (Computed Tomography) previously called CAT scans – (Computed Axial Tomography)

❖

Nuclear medicine scans

❖

MRI scans (Magnetic Resonance Imaging)

❖

Ultrasound

❖

PET/CT (Positron Emission Tomography/ Computed Axial Tomography)



The X-ray Shoe Fitting machine

Shoe fitting x-ray machines were common in department stores in the late 1940’s and early 1950’s. It produced an image of how your shoe fit which you could look at and see your toe bones move as you wiggled them.

By the 1970s, the radiation hazard of the shoe fitting x-ray was realized, eliminating its use as a shoe fitting device.

X-ray

1. Used to look for broken bones, problems in your lungs and abdomen, cavities in your teeth and many other problems.

2. X-ray technology uses electromagnetic radiation to make images. The image is recorded on a film, called a radiograph.

3. Calcium in bones absorbs X-rays the most, so bones look white on the radiograph. Fat and other soft tissues absorb less and look gray. Air absorbs the least, so lungs look black.

4. X-ray examination is painless, and the amount of radiation exposure you receive during an X-ray examination is small.





X-rays are moving from film to

digital files with both computed

radiography and digital

radiography.

This saves costs and the time to

develop the x-ray films.



Scintigraphy, also known as a Gamma scan, is a diagnostic test in nuclear medicine, where radioisotopes attached to drugs that travel to a specific organ or tissue (radiopharmaceuticals) are taken internally and the emitted gamma radiation is captured by external detectors to form two-dimensional images in a similar process to the capture of x-ray images.

Hand radiography and bone scintigraphy findings in rheumatoid arthritis

Computed Tomography (CT) Scans 1. Computed tomography (CT) (or Computed Axial Tomography (CAT) scans are a diagnostic procedure that uses special X-ray equipment to create cross-sectional pictures of your body.

2. CT images are produced using X-ray technology and powerful computers.

3. The uses of CT include looking for: Broken Bones

Cancer

Blood Clots

Signs of Heart Disease

Internal Bleeding





During a CT scan, you

lie still on a table.

The table slowly

passes through the

center of a large X-

ray machine.

The test is painless.

During some tests

you receive a contrast

dye, which makes

parts of your body

show up better in the

image.



CT scan of the abdomen

CT (computed tomography) scans use computers to reconstruct sectional views.

The x-ray source completes one revolution around the body every few seconds. It then moves a short distance and repeats the process.



SPIRAL CT SCAN

A spiral CT scan is a form of

three-dimensional imaging

technology

During a spiral CT scan, the

patient is on a platform that

advances at a steady pace

through the scanner while

the imaging source, usually

x-rays, rotates continuously

around the patient.

With this method, a higher

quality image is generated,

and the patient is exposed

to less radiation.



CT SCAN

3D reconstruction of CT Scan.

Objects are packets of cocaine.



PET (POSITRON

EMISSION

TOMOGRAPHY)

PET scan of the brain

Positron emission

tomography (PET) is

an imaging technique that

assesses metabolic and

physiological activity of a

structure.

A PET scan is an important

tool in evaluating healthy

or diseased brain function



NUCLEAR SCANS USING A PET (POSITRON EMISSION

TOMOGRAPHY) SCANNING PROCESS

1. Nuclear scanning uses

radioactive substances to

see structures and functions

inside your body.

2. Nuclear scans involve a

special camera that detects

energy coming from the

radioactive substance, called

a tracer.

3. Before the test, you receive

the tracer, often by an

injection. Although tracers

are radioactive, the dosage

is small.



During most nuclear

scanning tests, you lie

still on a scanning table

while the camera makes

images.

Most scans take 20 to 45

minutes.

Nuclear scans can help

doctors diagnose many

conditions, including

cancers, injuries and

infections.

They can also show how

organs like your heart

and lungs are working.



Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)

1. MRI’s do not use X-rays

2. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) uses a large magnet and radio waves to look at organs and structures inside your body.

3. Health care professionals use MRI scans to diagnose a variety of conditions, from torn ligaments, tumors, the brain, and spinal cord.



MRI MACHINE





MRI WITH CONTRAST

1. During an MRI, the

patient may be given

an injectable

contrast, or dye.

2. This contrast alters

the local magnetic

field.

3. Normal and

abnormal tissue will

respond differently

to this contrast.



A magnetic resonance imaging scan, more commonly known as an MRI scan, is a detailed cross-sectional image of a part of the body.

It is similar to a CT scan, but has a higher quality, so it is easier to see differences in tissues, as shown in the picture below.

WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A MRI AND A CT SCAN ?

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aQZ8tTZnQ8A



ULTRASOUND

1.

Ultrasound uses high-frequency sound waves to look at organs and structures inside the body.

2.

Health care professionals use them to view the heart, blood vessels, kidneys, liver and other organs.

3.

During pregnancy, doctors use ultrasound tests to examine the fetus.

4.

Unlike x-rays, ultrasound does not involve exposure to radiation.





During an Ultrasound test, a

Ultrasound

special technician or doctor

moves a device called a

transducer over part of your

body.

The transducer sends out sound

waves, which bounce off the

tissues inside your body.

The transducer also captures the

waves that bounce back.

Images are created from these

sound waves.

All Ultrasound is going toward

real-time 3-D images.



ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY - When

ultrasound is used to image

the heart, it is referred to as

an echocardiogram.

Echocardiography is a safe way to

see detailed structures of the

heart, including chamber size,

heart function, the valves of the

heart, as well as the pericardium

(the sac around the heart).

It is a great method for those

experiencing shortness of

breath or chest pain, to those

undergoing cancer

treatments.

It is one of the most commonly

used imaging methods in the

world due to its portability and

use in a variety of applications.



PET/CT

1. A PET/CT scan not

only helps doctors

locate a lesion more

accurately (CT), but it

also helps determine

how active the lesion

is on the molecular

level (PET).

2. A lesion is any

damage or abnormal

change in the tissue

of an organism,

usually caused by

disease or trauma



PALPATION is the practice of feeling the stiffness of a patient's tissues with the practitioner's hands.

Manual palpation dates back at least to 1500

BC, with the Egyptian Ebers

Papyrus and Edwin Smith Papyrus, both giving instructions on diagnosis with palpation.

In a breast self-examination, women look for hard lumps, as cancer is usually stiffer than healthy tissue.

Manual palpation, however, suffers from several important limitations: it is limited to tissues accessible to the physician's hand, it is distorted by any intervening tissue, and it A United States Army is qualitative but not quantitative.

doctor palpates a young

Vietnames girl's

Elastography, the measurement of tissue abdomen in the bac Ninh

Province of Vietnam

stiffness, seeks to address these challenges.



ELASTOGRAPHY

Elastography is a relatively new imaging process that maps the elastic properties of soft tissue. It emerged in the last 20 years.

It is useful in medical diagnoses, as elasticity can discern healthy from unhealthy tissue for specific organs/growths.

For example, cancerous tumors will often be harder than the surrounding tissue, and diseased livers are stiffer than healthy ones.

While not visible on conventional grayscale ultrasound (left), a strain elastography image (center) of the prostate gland detects a cancer (dark red area at lower left). The finding is confirmed by histology.



Conventional ultra-sonography (lower image) and elastography (supersonic shear imaging; upper image) of papillary thyroid carcinoma, a malignant cancer. The cancer (red) is much stiffer than the healthy tissue.



ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY - Sensor pads applied to the skin detect electrical signals coming from active muscles and nerves.

The signals are coordinated, amplified, and displayed as a real-time trace, usually a spiky or wavy line.

This technique includes electrocardiography (ECG) of the heart and electro-encephalography (EEG) of the brain’s nerve activity.





FLUOROSCOPY

While other tests are comparable to still photography, a fluoroscopy is like a motion picture of bodily functions. That’s because it shows moving body parts.

The procedure is often done with contrast dyes, which show how they flow through the body. While all of this is being done, an X-ray beam sends signals to a monitor.

Fluoroscopies are used to evaluate both hard and soft tissue, including bones, joints, organs and vessels. Blood flow exams often involve fluoroscopy.



Thoracic fluoroscopy using handheld fluorescent screen in 1909. No radiation protection is used, as the dangers of X-rays were not yet recognized.

79



ENDOSCOPY - A variety of telescope-like endoscopes are inserted through natural orifices or incisions to produce images of the body’s interior, using their own light source.

Some types are rigid, but many are flexible, utilizing fiberoptic technology, and can be bent and controlled as they are guided along.

They carry their own light source and may be equipped with tubes to introduce or remove fluids or gases, blades for surgery, forceps to take samples (biopsy), and perhaps a laser to cauterize damaged tissue.

Endoscopes have been developed to fit different body parts – a bronchosope for the airways, a gastroscope for the oesophagus and stomach, a laparoscope for the abdomen, and a proctoscope for the lower bowel.





*

* 25 mm (millimeters) = 1 inch





BIBLIOGRAPHY

Wikipedia – Diagnostic Imaging

Diagnostic Imaging - Techniques & Treatments slide presentation – by Juliane Monko & Dr. Frank Flanders - CTAE Resource Network Photo on slide 28 - Photo credit: By Ewelina Szczepanek-Parulska, Kosma Woliński, Adam Stangierski, Edyta Gurgul, Maciej Biczysko, Przemysław Majewski, Magdalena Rewaj-Łosyk, Marek Ruchała -

Comparison of Diagnostic Value of Conventional Ultrasonography and Shear Wave Elastography in the Prediction of Thyroid Lesions Malignancy, PLOS ONEDOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081532, CC BY 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=35718612

Photo on slide 27 - By Andreaslorenzcommon - Own work, CC BY 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=32760628

Microscopes

Magnification: refers to the

microscope’s power to increase an

object’s apparent size

Resolution: refers to the microscope’s power to show detail clearly

Light microscope like this one have a magnification range up to 1,000 times





Light Microscope





Light Microscope

Elodea - Aquatic Plant

40X

400X





TYPES OF MICROSCOPES

Light microscopy (LM) uses magnifying lenses to focus light rays.

In light microscopy, light passes through a thin section of material and enlarges it up to 2,000 times.

Higher magnifications are achieved with beams of subatomic particles called electrons, with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) – 20 to 100,000 times. The beam runs across a specimen coated with gold film. Electrons bounce off the surface contours, to create a three-dimensional image, as shown below.

SALT GRAINS

DAISY POLLEN GRAINS



Electron microscopes

produce an image of a

specimen by using a

beam of electrons rather

than a beam of light,

which produces much

higher-resolution images.

It has magnitude of

10,000x or more. They

can be used to visualize

the subcellular structures

of the cells.

Electron microscopy

can be of two types:

Scanning electron

THE FIRST TIME THAT AN ATOM COULD BE

microscope (SEM)

SEEN WITH A MICROSCOPE WAS IN 1983 – 36

YEARS AGO !!

Transmission electron

ZOOMING INTO A HAIR

microscope (TEM)

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r0IK46rL6Ec





Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)





Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)





Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)

Mosquito Head

200X

2000X



Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)

Fly Eye





Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)

Surface of

Tongue

Neuron

Inside of

Stomach





Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)

Pollen

Yeast

Red Blood

Cell,

Platelet,

and White

Blood Cell





Transmission Electron Microscope

(TEM)





Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) Herpes Virus

Plant Root Cell



TEM vs. SEM

Viruses leaving a cell



TRANSMISSION CRYO-ELECTRON

MICROSCOPY



(The EM stands for Electron Microscopy)



https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BJKkC0W-6Qk



THE END

WITH A LONG ZOOM INTO A TOOTH !!

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t4RgBZlKlJI





