Bones and Joints

Part 1

Leslie G Dodd, MD





Outline

• Review of normal anatomy, histology and

landmarks

• Growth and repair

• Congenital/hereditary disorders

• Metabolic disorders

• Inflammatory disease

• Arthritis/Pathology of the Joint





Bone Landmarks/ A &H

 Anatomic landmarks:

 Diaphysis central area

 Epiphysis growth plate

 Metaphysis active turnover; adjacent to

growth plate

 Cortex

 Medullary cavity

 Cancellous/trabec

ular bone

circumferential bone -- cortical; provides strength internal bone -- trabecular; provides large SA for hematopoiesis function function of bone:

strength from cortex

lightness from trabecular





Bone– Organization and

structure

bone is laid down in rings!





Bone A/H

polarized light shows bone striations; is laid down concentric rings 'appositional growth'

 Trabecular

(mature) bone laid

in lamellar fashion

 Immature bone is

woven; associated

with fracture,

repair, tumor,etc.

polarized light





Bone-woven bone vs lamellar

new bone

bone-woven

fracture callus: laid down in criss-cross after fracture to get strength back Bone-woven: criss-cross pattern; found in

diseased state, or whenever new bone is formed





Osteoblast Osteoblast: lays down matrix: bone matrix is Ca; most dry weight is collagen. Form line around edge of advancing bone. When bone is mature they become trapped as osteocytes Blasts = Build

 Responsible for

synthesizing bone

and mineralization

 In active growth or

remodeling at

edge of advancing

bone formation

 Entrapped to

become

osteocytes





Osteoclasts: constantly functioning; use 'enzymes and collagenases.'

Osteoclasts Sit in holes in bone called Howship's lacunae Clasts = Cut

 Responsible for

bone resorption

 Attach to bone

matrix protein

 Form Howship’s

lacunae





Bone development and

growth Intrachondral (long-bone) development: has to grow both in length and circumference

 Growth

 Enchondral

ossification

 Membranous

ossification

 Remodeling

 Physical/mechanical

forces

 Mineral deposition

and collagen

 Hormones and

paracrine/autocrine

functions





Bone growth—enchondral

ossification

Nutrient vessel forms trabecular space, lengthens bone cartilage precursor

slight calcification





Enchondral ossification

Get secondary cavity with, above, epiphyseal line (where growth occurs once you're born), have secondary centers of ossification (important for some pathophys and tumors) epiphyseal plate

secondary center





Skeletal maturity: 16-17yo (female), 17-19yo (male) Modeling and Remodeling

As juvenile, longitudinal growth occurs in epiphyses.

As adult, no longer capable of longitudinal growth b/c of fusions; epiphyseal line is where secondary growth occured juvenile; no epiphyseal line

adult: epiphyseal lines present





healing -- blood collects at site of trauma (hematoma). hematoma organizes region -- nutrients, cartilage precursors, come in, makes woven bone (lacks tensile strength). if ends align, healing occurs quickly. if ends are NOT aligned, very large callus forms. if any wiggling, wont form callus all the way. this is why you have to mobilize the fracture Fracture Callus

bad; wide break, poorly aligned

good; closely aligned





example of a bad fracture w/o treatment: callus doesnt form all the way; get bending/wiggling. get psuedoarthrosis ('false joint') predisposes to mech problem and infection Fracture repair

false joint

this is not an elbow..





LETS TALK ABOUT HEREDITARY DZS

Achondroplasia

long-bones dont grow; membranous bones DO grow. look short in stature and have short limbs, but normal sized head and trunk

 Achondroplasia (from



the Greek for "without

cartilage") is the most

common form of

dwarfism, occurring once

every 14,000 births .

 Symptoms of

achondroplasia include a

large head; shorter arms

and legs, especially

upper arms and thighs;

prominent forehead;

protruding jaw





Osteogenesis Imperfecta

defect in type I collagen

 OI an inherited disorder of collagen

maturation which results in abnormal

skeletal, ligament, skin, sclera and dentin

formation

 Major clinical criteria:

 Osteoporosis

 Blue sclera

 Dentigenesis imperfecta bad teeth

 Premature otosclerosis overgrowth of bones

responsible for hearing





OI Blue Sclera

Q: why is the sclera blue?

A: blue-gray color of the sclera is due to the

underlying choroidal veins which show through. This is due to the sclera being thinner than normal because of the defective Type I collagen not forming

correctly. Dr. H





Osteogenesis Imperfecta

osteogenesis imperfecta Type II (fetal) is lethal; autosomal recessive. in utero, babies have such fragile bones they fracture, dont survive the birth process





Osteopetrosis several different types: range from not severe (autosomal dom) to severe (autosomal recessive).



auto dominant not severe usually just have brittle bones

 Aka “Marble bone disease”

 Heterogeneous group of inheritable

conditions characterized by defect in

bone resorption by osteoclasts

 “types” based on severity:

 “Malignant”/infantile form

 Intermediate

 “Benign”/adult form





Osteopetrosis

 Pathologic features:

 Increased

susceptibility to

fracture

 Decreased marrow

'erlenmeyer flask deformity'

space = anemia,

neutropenia



 Radiographic features:

 Sclerotic bone

 Erlenmeyer flask

deformity

bone and hard, but are brittle and break easily





Osteopetrosis—Infantile

form

 Lack of bone remodeling

= insufficient marrow

cavity for hematopoiesis

 Extramedullary

hematopoiesis =

hepatosplenomegaly

 Failure to thrive,

compression effects or

severe anemia and

thrombocytopenia

infantile is most severe form (auto recessive). fetus is affected with bony overgrowth in utero most severe symptom / problem: marrow cavities dont form, so have to have hematopoiesis occur in spleen / liver.

adult is less severe form, will have multiple

get massive hepatosplenomegaly. get anemia, thrombocytopenia. usually expire at birth or shortly after.

fractures; 'inconvenient but compatible w life'





Osteo

'no matter what you go poro

into, you'll encounter this

sis

problem'



peak bone mass: 30 years; everyone gets it, slowly. but older white women get it the worst

 Decrease in amount of bone to the point of

spontaneous fracture or fracture after

minimal trauma

 In U.S. are 1.5 million osteoporotic fractures with est health care cost of $18 billion

 Older white women most frequently

affected

 Begins as early as 35; 0.2 percent loss per year

 After menopause loss accelerates





Osteoporosis

continued bone loss to the point that they can

fracture spontaneously or w/ miminum trauma

 Common fracture

sites:

 Proximal humerus

 Distal radius 'colles' fracture; very common

 Hip fracture susceptible b/c big,

weight bearing joint

 Spinal compression

fracture get multiple microfractures,

compresion type fractures

in long bones: you have a fall where you use

your arms to catch yourself. 'colles' fracture





Osteoporosis



femural neck also very susceptible b/c weight bearing vertebral bodies have big marrow space. VBs fracture anteriorly --

get curvature of spine. see it most commonly in older ladies.

known as 'dowajer's hump.'





 Iliac biopsy revealing Microarchitectural

deterioration: loss of bone, thinning of

remaining bone and lack of trabecular

connectivity

histo: L: relatively normal. see cortical area and trabeculae line up, give structural integrity.

R: cortices thinner, trabeculae dont line up or touch, so very weak so, lose the actual bone mass from both cortical bone and trabecular bone





there are genetic and env components.

Osteoporosis AAs dont lose bone as quickly as Cs.

if you live to 90yo as a woman, you are losing a LOT of bone density along the way peak of bone mass: 30yo

a fracture is very hard to recover from, especially with poor bones





Paget’s Disease

genetic: northern european

 Skeletal disorder with characteristic

clinical, x-ray and histologic changes

 Rare before age 40

 Est to involve 2-3% of population over 50.

 Common in individuals of English/Euro

descent and of areas settled by

immigration: US, Australia, New Zealand,

Argentina, South Africa

note that not everyone will have symptoms as severe as what she will describe





Paget’s Disease

for unknown reason, will have discoupled bone remodeling. alternating phases of osteoblastic w/o osteoclastic, vice versa, and a quiescent phase causing sclerosis.

effects: early phase: intense blood supply can cause high output cardiac failure, bone deformity can impinge of nerves, bone pain lab tests are not sensitive or specific

 Activation of

osteoblasts and

osteoclasts resulting

in abnormal

remodeling of bone.

 High tissue turnover

manifests as abnormal

lab results

 Elevated alkaline

phosphatase

 Urinary hydroxyproline

(collagen breakdown)





Paget’s Disease

fracture is one of the first symptoms

 Bone pain

 Paget bone is

prone to fracture

 Neurologic

symptoms

 Increased risk of

sarcoma

osteosarcoma. normally a dz of infants to adolescents. but second peak in >50yo due to pagets dz





Paget’s Disease

can be multi or uni focal

can be severe or clinically asymptomatic

 Imaging findings

depend on phase of

evidence of deformity, thickening, radiolucency

disease

 Deformity,

thickening and

coarsening

 Weak, “brittle”

bones

what are the three phases?

blastic phase

clastic phase (resorbed)

sclerotic phase





Paget’s histology

histo doesn't help to diagnose except for mosaic pattern of bone formation in burnt out, end stage.

what can happen in the early stage? high output heart failure healthy

mosaic





NOW STARTING METABOLIC DZS

Osteomalacia

collagen precursor does not get mineralized, so have a lack of osteoid green = unmineralized

red = bone being laid down in a nice lamellar pattern

 Defect in mineralization

of bone = increase in

unmineralized osteoid = lack of osteoid

 Numerous mechanisms:

 Dietary deficiencies

 Renal tubule leak (Ph)

 Hepatobiliary disease

 Metal poisoning

 Drugs

 Malabsorption





Rickets

reached peak incidence in early industrial era in the UK, where lots of malnutrition and lack of exposure to sunlight.

in developing infant / newborn, affects of osteomalacia are very profound. get irreversible deformity and bowing of the legs. rickets not 'just historic' due to food fat-ism, continued malnutrition

 Osteomalacia of

childhood

 Skeletal effects more

profound on

developing skeleton

 Disturbances of

growth plate =

deformity and

dwarfism





Regulation of calcium homeostasis

Review Normal Body - Dr. H

GI malabsorption syndrome

kidney dz -- where Ca, P are reabsorbed

liver

lack of sunlight





Hyperparathyroidism

 Primary and

secondary there is 1ary, 2dary, 3iary forms.

 Increased PTH leads

to osteoclastic bone

resorption

histology depends on underlying metabolic defect..





Hyperparathyroidism—

Brown tumor unusual presentation: localized defect in bone where it simulates a tumor.

HPTism will give bone pseudotumors that mimic bone tumor Proliferation of osteoclasts causes 'pseudotumor'

bone is just full of osteoclasts. giant cell tumor looks almost identical -- look out for it on next lecture!





Osteonecrosis

Causes:

femoral head - most frequent bone to be affected

 Traumatic

 Iatrogenic: long-term steroid use

 Radiation

 Corticosteroids

 Sickle cell disease

watershed area susceptible

to infarct

 Gaucher Disease

 Alcohol

 Idiopathic

large number of cases are idiopathic; unclear





Osteonecrosis

 Histologic changes:

 Loss of marrow and

fat saponification

 Loss of osteocyte

nuclei bone dies, marrow becomes fibrotic, get fat saponification





INFECTIOUS DZS

Osteomyelitis

 Pyogenic/bacterial

 Routes of spread

 Hematogenous

 Extension from

contiguous site

 Direct implantation

(trauma)

usually bacterial; any systemic infection is a risk factor.

systemic ie UTIs,

commonly due to really bad trauma / fractures (especially that involve a break in the skin)





Ostoemyelitis –organisms

 50% -- no organism is ever isolated

even if you do isolate, can be polybacterial

 Other:

 Staphylococcus aureus very commonly isolated

 E Coli, Pseudomonas, Klebsiella also commonly isolated

 Haemophiles influenza, Group B strep in peds

 Salmonella in sickle cell patients

'this makes a good test q'





Osteomyelitis





Osteomyelitis-Brodie’s

Abscess

Brodie's Abscess describes a small, focal area of osteomyelitis: seen especially in children; painful patients can can have increased sed rate. 'just go in and evacuate them.'

 Possible outcomes of

untreated/undertreat

ed osteomyelitis

 Low-grade, well

localized bone

abscess





Osteomyelitis- sequestrum

and involucrum

dead bone that is a nidus of infection; used

clinically to describe an area of concern

native, healthy bone that forms around the sequestrum to seal it off from the rest of the body; not really used clinically sequestrum

involucrum

'this is a cow bone.'





Potts Disease

 Increasing incidence

with globalization

and increase in

iatrogenic or

acquired

immunosuppression

 Pulmonary disease is

most common but

subset will form

osteomyelitis



special type of osteomyelitis due to TB. tuberculoid osteomyelitis is a bad dz --

likes to infect the spine, is very destructive. causes all types of destructive foci, causes soft tissue calcification, can get ankylosis of vertebrae.

'if you see an infection of the spine, think potts dz.'





Potts Disease

 Fragmentation of

vertebral bodies

 Obliteration of disc

space

 Calcified soft tissue

masses

 Encroachment on

spinal canal





TB infection in soft tissue!!

Mycobacteria





Osteoarthritis

happens to all of us: degeneration and process of wear and tear helps to cause this.

secondary effects -- repeated trauma (athlete), overweight, malalignment in joint, etc.

 AKA “Degenerative joint disease”

 Ubiquitous process with increasing prevalence

relative to age

 Different manifestations in depending on

location, severity

 Clinical: Pain and stiffness, lack of mobility

 Primary osteoarthritis– “wear and tear”

 Secondary OA-congenital deformity, repeated

mechanical trauma, obesity, other underlying

disease





Osteoarthritis

'probably genetic underpinning and env, but is ubiquitous; just wear and tear'





Osteoarthritis

femoral head

large weightbearing joints are most affected. the articular surface is fibrillated ('torn up'). get pieces of cartilage that fall off due to degenerative process, fall into the joint, called joint mice. joint mice move around, cause some clicking, popping, immobalization. accounts for some, but another process also occurs -- see next slide

 Histologic changes:

 Fibrillation and

cracking of the of the

surface articular

cartilage

 Loss of cartilage and

formation of “joint

mice”





Osteoarthritis—histologic

changes

 Exposure of

underlying bone

(eburnation)

 Formation of

osteophytes and

cysts within the

subchondral bone

as that happens, get intensively painful bone-on-bone grinding. bone tries to remodel itself, but has poor architecture, causing osteophytes -- irregular protrusions of bone. this exacerbates the problems -- decrease in range of motion and increased pain





Osteoarthritis



femoral head -- collapse of joint space. thinning, grinding of bone on bone; causes pain

osteophytes in periphery





Manifestations of

osteoarthritis sometimes get first in hands. get inflam and deformity in hands.

notice that THIS deformity in hands is different that seen in RA.



Heberden's and Bouchard's nodes





Osteoarthritis





Osteoarthritis

 Laboratory findings non-specific except for 'joint mice'

 Normal sedimentation rate

 Synovial fluid is clear/viscosity normal

 Fragments in fluid have joint mice in synovial fluid. can be small or can be macroscopic

 Treatment 'fortunately very good'

 Anti-inflammatory/Analgesics

 Surgical lots of anti-inflam and analgesics. once they stop working shift to surgical tx.

'we have an epidemic of hip and knee replacements'.





Must be able to differentiate RA

from OA.

Rheumatoid arthritis

RA: small joints (hands and feet) first. is inflammatory, systemic dz. caused by autoantibody IgM attacking Fc portion of normal Ig. in RA, get 'villus hypertrophy' -- lining of joints get inflamed, get influx of inflammatory cells, inflamed tissue grows, starts to invade into the bone, causes deformity. also get changes in soft tissue and vessels (bc is systemic dz)

 Chronic, systemic

inflammatory

disorder associated

with autoimmune

factors

 Manifests as joint

disease but to lesser

extent skin/soft

tissue (rheumatoid

nodules) and vessels





affects proximal joints of hands

Rheumatoid arthritis

'ulnar deformity of the hands.' usually women b/c more susceptible. large joints get involved relatively late in the dz.

 Affects small joints

before large joints

 Hands and feet ;

later wrists, ankles,

cervical spine

 More common in

women than men; 40

to 70. Genetic

susceptibility





Rheumatoid arthritis

this is inflammatory disease. in synovium, which is hypertrophic, see influx of inflammatory cells. synovium makes pannus, pannus invades cartilage, which takes cartilage off and 'throws it' into the joint. 'rice bodies cause all kinds of problems.' rice bodies are made up of hypertrophic synovium that break off.





Rheumatoid arthritis

 Diagnosis on basis of

multiple clinical and

lab findings

 Other findings:

 Rheumatoid nodule

 Lab:

foci of necrosis can occur on elbows, arms.

 Serum Rheumatoid

factor: IgM to Fc of

IgG





Other common deformities

instead of ulnar, can get boutonniere ('button hole') and swan-neck deformity.

'nice testable question'





Juvenile Rheumatoid

Arthritis occurs in persons <18.

affects large joints.

histology is the same as RA, but dont have the RhF as seen in adults (usually 80% adults). instead have ANA+.

 Begins in large joints:

 Knees, ankles, elbow

 Rheumatoid factor is

negative

 ANA is positive





Rheumatoid variants

related in pathophys but have different etiologies; usually related to HLA-B27.

ankylosing spondylitis -- affects more men than women. path: isolated to spine -- get inflammation and ankylosis (complete fusion of elements of the spine). causes devastatingly limited mobility.

 AKA Seronegative

spondyloarthopathies

 HLA-B27

 Ankylosing

spondylitis, psoriatic

arthritis, mixed

connective tissue

disease, others





'GOUT IN ONE MINUTE!'

Gout 'the dz of kings.' usually have a very rich diet (meat, alcohol instead of just grains).

distinct clinical presentation -- pain in the toe!

 Intense pain in



peripheral joints

 Usually occurs in

adult men

 Diet and alcohol

consumption

 Genetic

predisposition





Gout uric acid crystal is elevated in individuals; usually due to defect in urate metabolism enzyme. when urate is super-saturated, goes to the coldest place of the body (distal extremity) and crystalizes.

it is the inflammation that gets recruited to the cryrstaline deposits that causes the pain.

 Precipitation of

sodium urate crystals

in and around joints

 Predilection for small

peripheral joints,

particularly

metatarsal

phalangeal





Gout--Diagnosis

distinct clinical pres: elevated serum uric acid. if you aspirate, can see crystaline uric acid needles.

 Demonstration of

refractile needle

shaped crystals in

joint fluid and tissue

 elevated serum urate

levels





Gout vs Pseudogout

pseudogout can mimic gout. caused by Ca crystal. this dz has a lot of similarites but dont have elvated uric acid (or if is elevated, it is not the cause of arthropathy).

usually ass'd with several other types of dzs, ie collagen and vascular dzs that increase with age

 Deposition of Calcium

Pyrophosphate

Dihydrate crystals

(CPPD) in synovial fluid

and tissue

 Simulates other

diseases: Gout, DJD,

RA

 Prevalence increases

with age





Crystals gout vs

pseudogout

pseudogout -- dense Ca rhomboid deposits

gout -- long, sharp uric acid needles

Path – Bone metabolic disease

Serum

Serum

Alk

PTH

Comments

Calcium

Phosphate Phos

Osteoporosis

C: Elderly, postmenopausal

-

-

-

-

E: ↓ bone mass

Osteopetrosis

C: Failed normal bone resorption

(marble bone)

-

-

-

-

E: Thickened dense bones, anemia,

infection-prone, etc.

Osteomalacia

C: Defective mineralization

/Rickets

↓

↓

-

↑

E: Bowing of legs, “Rosary chest”

Osteitis

C: Hyperparathyroidism

fibrosa cystica

E: “Brown” tumors – cystic spaces

/“Von Reckl-

↑

↓

↑

↑

lined by osteoclasts and full of

inghausin’s”

stroma and sometimes blood

Paget’s

C: Increased osteoblastic and

Disease

-

-

↑

-

osteoclastic actibity (~balanced)

E: Mosaic bone pattern. Can lead

to osteogenic sarcoma

Slide from MSIII USMLE Review!





