C H A P T E R 1

Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin



Paul A.J. Kolarsick, BS, Maria Ann Kolarsick, MSN, ARNP-C, and Carolyn Goodwin, APRN-BC, FNP





Introduction


cells known as keratinocytes, which function to synthesize keratin, a long, threadlike protein with a protective role.

The skin is the largest organ of the body, accounting for The middle layer, the dermis, is fundamentally made up of about 15% of the total adult body weight. It performs many the fibrillar structural protein known as collagen. The der-vital functions, including protection against external physical, mis lies on the subcutaneous tissue, or panniculus, which chemical, and biologic assailants, as well as prevention of ex-contains small lobes of fat cells known as lipocytes. The cess water loss from the body and a role in thermoregulation.

thickness of these layers varies considerably, depending on The skin is continuous, with the mucous membranes lining the geographic location on the anatomy of the body. The the body’s surface (Kanitakis, 2002).

eyelid, for example, has the thinnest layer of the epidermis, The integumentary system is formed by the skin and measuring less than 0.1 mm, whereas the palms and soles its derivative structures (see Figure 1-1). The skin is of the feet have the thickest epidermal layer, measuring composed of three layers: the epidermis, the dermis, and approximately 1.5 mm. The dermis is thickest on the back, subcutaneous tissue (Kanitakis, 2002). The outermost where it is 30–40 times as thick as the overlying epidermis level, the epidermis, consists of a specific constellation of (James, Berger, & Elston, 2006).

Figure 1-1. Cross-Section of Skin and Panniculus Apocrine

unit

Straight duct

Epidermis

Meissner nerve

Coiled gland

ending

papillary

Eccrine

Dermis

sweat unit

Straight duct

reticular

Straight duct

Sebaceous gland

Coiled duct

Arrector pili muscle

Eccrine gland

Hair shaft

Dermal

Pacini nerve ending

vasculature

Subcutaneous tissue

Superficial plexus

Deep plexus

Note. From Andrews’ Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology (10th ed., p. 1), by W.D. James, T.G. Berger, and D.M. Elston, 2006, Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders. Copyright 2006 by Elsevier Saunders. Reprinted with permission.

1



SKIN CANCER

Epidermis

individual cell populations pass not only one another but also melanocytes and Langerhans cells as they move toward the The epidermis is a stratified, squamous epithelium layer surface of the skin (Chu, 2008).

that is composed primarily of two types of cells: keratinocytes and dendritic cells. The keratinocytes differ from the “clear”

Keratinocytes

dendritic cells by possessing intercellular bridges and ample amounts of stainable cytoplasm (Murphy, 1997). The epidermis At least 80% of cells in the epidermis are the ectodermally harbors a number of other cell populations, such as melanocytes, derived keratinocytes. The differentiation process that occurs Langerhans cells, and Merkel cells, but the keratinocyte cell as the cells migrate from the basal layer to the surface of the type comprises the majority of the cells by far. The epidermis skin results in keratinization, a process in which the kerati-commonly is divided into four layers according to keratino-nocyte first passes through a synthetic and then a degradative cyte morphology and position as they differentiate into horny phase (Chu, 2008). In the synthetic phase, the cell builds up a cells, including the basal cell layer (stratum germinativum), cytoplasmic supply of keratin, a fibrous intermediate filament the squamous cell layer (stratum spinosum), the granular cell arranged in an alpha-helical coil pattern that serves as part layer (stratum granulosum), and the cornified or horny cell layer of the cell’s cytoskeleton. Bundles of these keratin filaments (stratum corneum) (James et al., 2006; Murphy) (see Figure converge on and terminate at the plasma membrane forming 1-2). The lower three layers that constitute the living, nucleated the intercellular attachment plates known as desmosomes.

cells of the epidermis are sometimes referred to as the stratum During the degradative phase of keratinization, cellular malpighii and rete malpighii (Murphy).

organelles are lost, the contents of the cell are consolidated The epidermis is a continually renewing layer and gives rise into a mixture of filaments and amorphous cell envelopes, to derivative structures, such as pilosebaceous apparatuses, and the cell finally is known as a horny cell or corneocyte.

nails, and sweat glands. The basal cells of the epidermis un-The process of maturation resulting in cell death is known as dergo proliferation cycles that provide for the renewal of the terminal differentiation (James et al., 2006).

outer epidermis. The epidermis is a dynamic tissue in which cells are constantly in unsynchronized motion, as differing Basal Layer

The basal layer, also known as the stratum germinativum, Figure 1-2. Three Basic Cell Types in the Epidermis contains column-shaped keratinocytes that attach to the basement membrane zone with their long axis perpendicular to the dermis. These basal cells form a single layer and adhere to one another as well as to more superficial squamous cells through desmosomal junctions (Murphy, 1997). Other distinguishing features of the basal cells are their dark-staining oval or elongated nuclei and the presence of melanin pigment K

L

transferred from adjoining melanocytes (Murphy).

The basal layer is the primary location of mitotically active cells in the epidermis that give rise to cells of the outer epidermal L

layers. However, not all basal cells have the potential to divide (Jones, 1996; Lavker & Sun, 1982). Epidermal stem cells in the M

basal layer are clonogenic cells with a long lifespan that progress K

through the cell cycle very slowly under normal conditions. Hy-perplasiogenic conditions, such as wounding, can increase the M

number of cycling cells in the epidermis by stimulating division of stem cells. DNA damage caused by carcinogenic agents may mutate cell proliferation machinery and can also affect the rate D

of cellular division. Migration of a basal cell from the basal layer The three basic cell types in the epidermis include keratinocytes to the cornified layer in humans takes at least 14 days, and the (some labeled K ) and Langerhans cells ( L) in the Malpighian layer and melanocytes ( M ) in the basal layer. Arrows point to transit through the cornified layer to the outermost epidermis the basement membrane zone, which separates the basal layer requires another 14 days (Chu, 2008).

of the epidermis from the underlying dermis ( D).

Note. From Andrews’ Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology Squamous Cell Layer

(10th ed., p. 4), by W.D. James, T.G. Berger, and D.M. Elston, 2006, Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders. Copyright 2006 by El-Overlying the basal cell layer is a layer of the epidermis sevier Saunders. Reprinted with permission.

that is 5–10 cells thick and known as the squamous cell layer 2

CHAPTER 1. ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SKIN

or stratum spinosum (Murphy, 1997). The squamous layer is The keratohyaline granules are deeply basophilic and composed of a variety of cells that differ in shape, structure, irregular in shape and size, and they are necessary in the and subcellular properties depending on their location. Supra-formation of both the interfibrillary matrix that holds keratin basal spinous cells, for example, are polyhedral in shape and filaments together and the inner lining of the horny cells.

have a rounded nucleus, whereas cells of the upper spinous Enzymatic action of the keratohyaline granules results in the layers are generally larger in size, become flatter as they are production of “soft” keratin in the epidermis by providing pushed toward the surface of the skin, and contain lamellar periodic cutting of keratin filaments. In contrast, the hair and granules (Chu, 2008). Lamellar granules are membrane-bound nails do not contain keratohyaline granules, and the tonofibril organelles containing glycoproteins, glycolipids, phospholip-filaments traversing the cell cytoplasm will harden because of ids, free sterols, and a number of acid hydrolases, including the incorporation of disulfide bonds, producing “hard” keratin lipases, proteases, acid phosphatases, and glycosidases. The in those structures (Matoltsy, 1976; Schwarz, 1979).

abundance of hydrolytic enzymes indicates that the lamel-Lysosomal enzymes present only in small amounts in the lar granules are a type of lysosome. Although the lamellar stratum basalis and stratum spinosum are found at high lev-granules primarily are active in cells at the interface between els in the stratum granulosum because the granular layer is the granular and cornified layers, they also function in cells a keratogenous zone of the epidermis. Here, the dissolution of the upper spinous layer to deliver precursors of stratum of cellular organelles is prepared as the cells of the granular corneum lipids into the intercellular space (Haake & Hol-layer undergo the abrupt terminal differentiation process to a lbrook, 1999).

horny cell of the cornified layer (Chu, 2008).

Intercellular spaces between spinous cells are bridged by abundant desmosomes that promote mechanical coupling be-Cornified Layer

tween cells of the epidermis and provide resistance to physical stresses. Organized concentrically around the nucleus, keratin Horny cells (corneocytes) of the cornified layer provide filaments in the cytoplasm are bound to desmosomal plaques mechanical protection to the underlying epidermis and a bar-at one end and remain free at the end closer to the nucleus rier to prevent water loss and invasion by foreign substances (Murphy, 1997). The desmosomal plaques are composed of (Jackson, Williams, Feingold, & Elias, 1993). The corneo-six polypeptides found on the cytoplasmic side of the cell cytes, which are rich in protein and low in lipid content, are membrane that are important in the regulation of the calcium surrounded by a continuous extracellular lipid matrix (Chu, required for desmosomal assembly and maintenance (Fairley, 2008). The large, flat, polyhedral-shaped horny cells have lost Scott, Jensen, Goldsmith, & Diaz, 1991; Hennings & Holbrook, their nuclei during terminal differentiation and technically 1983; Lin, Mascaro, Liu, Espana, & Diaz, 1997). The spine-like are considered to be dead (Chu; Murphy, 1997). The physical appearance of the numerous desmosomes along cell margins is and biochemical properties of cells in the cornified layer vary where the stratum spinosum derives its name (Chu, 2008).

in accordance with position in order to promote desquama-Gap junctions are another type of connection between epi-tion moving outward. For instance, cells in the middle have dermal cells. Essentially forming an intercellular pore, these a much higher capacity for water-binding than the deeper junctions allow for physiologic communication via chemi-layers because of the high concentration of free amino acids cal signals that is vital in the regulation of cell metabolism, found in the cytoplasm of middle layer cells. The deep cells growth, and differentiation (Caputo & Peluchetti, 1977).

also are more densely compact and display a greater array of intercellular attachments than the more superficial layers.

Granular Layer

Desmosomes undergo proteolytic degradation as the cells progress outward, contributing to the shedding of corneocytes The most superficial layer of the epidermis containing during desquamation (Haake & Hollbrook, 1999).

living cells, the granular layer or stratum granulosum, is composed of flattened cells holding abundant keratohyaline granules in their cytoplasm. These cells are responsible for The Regulation of Epidermal Proliferation further synthesis and modification of proteins involved in and Differentiation

keratinization (Chu, 2008). The granular layer varies in thickness in proportion to that of the overlying horny cell layer. For As a perpetually regenerating tissue, the epidermis must example, under thin cornified layer areas, the granular layer maintain a relatively constant number of cells as well as regu-may be only 1–3 cell layers in thickness, whereas under the late the interactions and junctions between epidermal cells.

palms of the hands and soles of the feet the granular layer Adhesions between keratinocytes, the interactions of kerati-may be 10 times this thickness. A very thin or absent granular nocytes and immigrant cells, the adhesion between the basal layer can lead to extensive parakeratosis in which the nuclei lamina and the underlying dermis, and the process of terminal of keratinocytes persist as the cells move into the stratum differentiation to produce corneocytes must be regulated as corneum, resulting in psoriasis (Murphy, 1997).

cells relocate during development as well as throughout life 3



SKIN CANCER

(Haake & Hollbrook, 1999). Epidermal morphogenesis and Figure 1-3. Portion of a Melanocyte From Dark Skin differentiation is regulated in part by the underlying dermis, which also plays a critical role in the maintenance of postnatal structure and function. The epidermal-dermal interface is also a key site in the development of epidermal appendages.

The maintenance of a constant epidermal thickness depends also on intrinsic properties of epidermal cells, such as the ability to undergo apoptosis, programmed cell death.

Apoptosis follows an orderly pattern of morphologic and biochemical changes resulting in cell death without injury to neighboring cells, as is often the case in necrosis. This major homeostatic mechanism is regulated by a number of cellular signaling molecules including hormones, growth factors, and cytokines. In the skin, apoptosis is important in developmental remodeling, regulation of cell numbers, and defense against mutated, virus-infected, or otherwise damaged cells. Terminal differentiation is a type of apoptosis evolved to convert the keratinocyte into the protective corneocyte (Haake & Hollbrook, 1999). The disruption of dynamic equilibrium maintaining constant epidermal thickness can result in conditions such as psoriasis, whereas the dysregulation of apoptosis is often seen D

in tumors of the skin (Kerr, Wyllie, & Currie, 1972).

Melanosomes are indicated by broad arrows. Thin arrows point to the basement membrane zone between the epidermis and the underlying dermis ( D).

Nonkeratinocyte Cells of the Epidermis Note. From Andrews’ Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology (10th ed., p. 4), by W.D. James, T.G. Berger, and D.M. Elston, Melanocytes

2006, Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders. Copyright 2006 by Elsevier Saunders. Reprinted with permission.

The melanocyte is a dendritic, pigment-synthesizing cell derived from the neural crest and confined in the skin predominantly to the basal layer (Chu, 2008). Branching into Increased ultraviolet light exposure stimulates an increase more superficial layers, extensions of the melanocyte come in melanogenesis and a corresponding increase in melanosome into contact with keratinocytes but do not form cellular junc-transfer to keratinocytes where the melanosomes will aggre-tions. Melanocytes are responsible for the production of the gate toward the superficial side of the nucleus. This response, pigment melanin and its transfer to keratinocytes. Melanin is which results in tanning of the skin, increases the cell’s ability produced in a rounded, membrane-bound organelle known as to absorb light and thus protect genetic information in the the melanosome via a series of receptor-mediated, hormone-nucleus from damaging radiation.

stimulated, enzyme-catalyzed reactions (Haake & Hollbrook, 1999).

Merkel Cells

Melanosomes are moved to the end of the melanocyte processes that lie closest to the skin surface and are transferred Merkel cells are oval-shaped, slow-adapting, type I to keratinocytes (see Figure 1-3). In white skin, these mel-mechanoreceptors located in sites of high tactile sensitiv-anosomes are aggregated into membrane-bound melanosome ity that are attached to basal keratinocytes by desmosomal complexes containing two or three melanosomes, whereas junctions. Merkel cells are found in the digits, lips, regions melanosomes tend to be removed from these complexes more of the oral cavity, and outer root sheath of the hair follicle rapidly in keratinocytes of individuals with dark skin. Heavily and are sometimes assembled into specialized structures pigmented skin can be attributed to the greater production of known as tactile discs or touch domes (Moll, 1994). Rela-melanosomes in melanocytes, the higher degree of melaniza-tively small deformations of adjoining keratinocytes are tion in each melanosome, the larger size of melanosomes, the stimulus enough to cause Merkel cells to secrete a chemi-greater amount of dispersion of melanosomes in keratinocytes, cal signal that generates an action potential in the adjoin-and the slower rate of melanosome degradation in comparison ing afferent neuron, which relays the signal to the brain.

to fair skin (Flaxman, Sosis, & Van Scott, 1973; Murphy, 1997; The high concentration of Merkel cells in certain regions Olson, Nordquist, & Everett, 1970).

such as the fingertips results in smaller and more densely 4

CHAPTER 1. ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SKIN

packed receptive fields and thus higher tactile resolution Epidermal Appendages

and sensitivity.

The skin adnexa are a grouping of ectodermally derived Langerhans Cells

appendages, including eccrine and apocrine glands, ducts, and pilosebaceous units that originate as downgrowths from Langerhans cells are involved in a variety of T-cell responses.

the epidermis during development. After injury, all adnexal Derived from the bone marrow, these cells migrate to a suprabasal structures are capable of reepithelialization via the migration position in the epidermis early in embryonic development and of keratinocytes from adnexal epithelium to the surface of the continue to circulate and repopulate the epidermis throughout epidermis. Because areas such as the face and scalp contain a life. The cells are dendritic and do not form cellular junctions large quantity of pilosebaceous units, reepithelialization occurs with neighboring cells. Langerhans cells constitute 2%–8% of more rapidly after injury in these areas than in areas with fewer the total epidermal cell population and maintain nearly constant adnexal structures, such as the back (James et al., 2006).

numbers and distributions in a particular area of the body. In the epidermis, the cells mainly are distributed among the squamous Eccrine Sweat Glands

and granular layers with fewer cells in the basal layer. They are found in other squamous epithelia in addition to the epidermis, Eccrine sweat glands are involved in the regulation of heat including the oral cavity, esophagus, and vagina, as well as in and are most abundant on the soles of the feet and least plentiful lymphoid organs and in the normal dermis (Chu, 2008).

on the back (Murphy, 1997; Sato & Dobson, 1970). The sweat Langerhans cells must recognize and process soluble an-glands originate as a band of epithelial cells growing downward tigens found in epidermal tissue. When a membrane-bound from the epidermal ridge (Mauro & Goldsmith, 2008). This antigen is ingested via endocytosis, cell granules are formed.

tubular, or ductal, structure is modified during development The contents of these granules are delivered to phagolyso-to generate the three composite parts of the eccrine sweat unit, somes in the cytoplasm containing hydrolytic enzymes similar which are the intraepidermal spiral duct, the straight dermal to those found in macrophages. In the first stage of life, the portion, and the coiled secretory duct (see Figure 1-1) (James Langerhans cells are weak stimulators of unprimed T cells but et al., 2006; Mauro & Goldsmith). The spiral duct opens onto are able to ingest and process antigens. Later, once the cell the skin surface and is composed of dermal duct cells that have has become an effective activator of naïve T cells, activation migrated upward. Cells undergo cornification within the duct, via contact with the antigen will not trigger phagocytosis but and the corneocytes produced ultimately will become part of the rather will stimulate cell migration (Udey, 1997).

cornified layer. The straight dermal segment connects the superficial spiral duct to the inner secretory portion of the gland.

The secretory coil of the eccrine unit lies deep in the der-The Dermal-Epidermal Junction

mis or within the superficial panniculus and is composed of glycogen-rich clear secretory cells, dark mucoidal cells, and The interface between the epidermis and dermis is formed myoepithelial cells specialized in contractile properties (James by a porous basement membrane zone that allows the exchange et al., 2006; Mauro & Goldsmith, 2008). Clear cells rest either of cells and fluid and holds the two layers together (James et al., on the basement membrane or on the myoepithelial cells and 2006). Basal keratinocytes are the most important components form intercellular canaliculi where two clear cells adjoin. The of structures of the dermal-epidermal junction; dermal fibro-canaliculi open directly into the lumen of the gland (Mauro & blasts are also involved but to a lesser extent (Gayraud, Hopfner, Goldsmith). Large, glycogen-rich inner epithelial cells initi-Jassim, Aumailley, & Bruckner-Tuderman, 1997).

ate the formation of sweat in response to a thermal stimulus.

The basal lamina is a layer synthesized by basal cells of Initially an isotonic solution, the darker mucoidal cells in the the epidermis consisting mainly of type IV collagen as well secretory coil and in the dermal duct actively reabsorb sodium as anchoring fibrils and dermal microfibrils. This includes an from sweat in the duct, thereby resulting in the extremely electron-lucent zone known as the lamina lucida as well as hypotonic solution that is emitted onto skin surface through the lamina densa (Aumailley & Krieg, 1996; Lin et al., 1997; the intraepidermal spiral duct. This response promotes cooling Masunaga et al., 1996; Wheelock & Jensen, 1992). The plasma while conserving sodium (James et al.).

membranes of basal cells are attached to the basal lamina by rivet-like hemidesmosomes that distribute tensile or shearing Apocrine Sweat Glands

forces through the epithelium. The dermal-epidermal junction acts as support for the epidermis, establishes cell polarity Whereas eccrine glands are primarily involved in thermal and direction of growth, directs the organization of the cy-regulation, apocrine glands are involved in scent release (Mur-toskeleton in basal cells, provides developmental signals, and phy, 1997). Apocrine sweat glands in humans are confined functions as a semipermeable barrier between layers (Stepp, mainly to the regions of the axillae and perineum, and unlike Spurr-Michaud, Tisdale, Elwell, & Gipson, 1990).

eccrine and apoeccrine glands, they do not open directly to 5

SKIN CANCER

the skin surface. Instead, the intraepithelial duct opens into cells from which the dermal papilla is formed (James et al.; pilosebaceous follicles, entering in the infundibulum above the Hashimoto, 1970a).

sebaceous duct. The basal secretory coil of apocrine glands, Differentiation occurs at the lower portion of the hair fol-which is normally located entirely in subcutaneous fat, differs licle forming the hair cone and later the hair, the cuticle, and from that of eccrine glands in that it is composed exclusively the two inner root sheaths. Differentiation also occurs in the of secretory cells; no ductal cells are present (Murphy).

upper segments of the follicle producing the hair canal in Apocrine sweat glands develop their secretory portions the upper dermis, through the epidermis, and opening to the and become active just before puberty, a response induced surface prior to the time that the growing hair cone reaches presumably by hormonal signals. The proteinaceous, viscous the upper follicle (Hashimoto, 1970b).

secretion has distinct odor and can function as a territorial The sebaceous gland forms from a bud in the fetal hair marker, warning signal, and sexual attractant, but its sexual follicle. Along the same side of the follicle but below the functions may now be vestigial in humans. Difficulties in sebaceous gland, another bud develops into an attachment for acquiring pure samples of apocrine sweat have made it im-the arrector pili muscle. The arrector pili (AP) are a smooth possible to determine the exact chemical composition of the muscle bundle that attaches to the external root sheath of secretion (Mauro & Goldsmith, 2008).

the follicle. The distal end of the AP muscle shows multiple branches at the level of the papillary dermis. The bulge, which Apoeccrine Sweat Glands

is the zone of the AP muscle’s follicular attachment, is thought to contain epithelial stem cells responsible for regenerating The apoeccrine sweat gland (AEG) develops during follicles, a crucial role in the hair growth cycle (Cotsarelis, puberty from eccrine-like precursors, opening directly unto Sun, & Lavker, 1990). On the opposite side of the follicle, a the skin. Discovered during the isolation of human axillary third bud forms above the plane of the sebaceous gland and sweat from patients with axillary hyperhidrosis, a condition develops into the apocrine gland. The region of the follicle characterized by abnormally increased rates of perspiration, above the sebaceous gland is known as the infundibular the AEG is found in the adult axillae; its relative frequency segment, and the region between the sebaceous duct and AP

varies from person to person. Like eccrine glands, the AEG

attachment is known as the isthmus (James et al., 2006). The opens directly to the skin surface. The AEG has a secretory region below the isthmus is known as the inferior portion and rate as much as 10 times that of the eccrine gland and is there-contains the bottom of the follicle as well as the hair bulb. The fore thought to contribute to axillary hyperhidrosis (Mauro inferior segment undergoes cycles of involution and regenera-

& Goldsmith, 2008).

tion throughout life, whereas the infundibular and isthmus portions remain permanently (James et al.).

Hair Follicles

Rapidly proliferating cells in the hair bulb, called matrix cells, are responsible for the production of the hair shaft as Hair has many valuable biologic functions including well as the inner and outer root sheaths (James et al., 2006).

protection from the elements and distribution of sweat-gland Both the hair shaft and the inner root sheath progress upward products. In addition, it has an important psychosocial role as the hair grows until the inner sheath reaches the isthmus in society. Hair follicles vary considerably in size and shape, and sheds (James et al.). Matrix cells moving up the follicle depending on their location, but they all have the same basic are compressed as they enter the rigid inner root sheath (see structure. The number and distribution of hair follicles over Figure 1-4). The number of cells entering the sheath deter-the body and the future phenotype of each hair is established mines the size of the hair, and the dimensions and curvature during fetal development; no extra follicles are added after of the inner root sheath determine the shape of the hair (Paus birth (Kratochwil, Dull, Farinas, Galceran, & Grosschedl,

& Cotsarelis, 1999). For example, the hairs on the scalp of 1996; Millar, 1997; Paus & Cotsarelis, 1999; Paus, Foitzik, Caucasians are round while pubic, facial, and eyelash hairs are Welker, Bulfone-Paus, & Eichmuller, 1997; St-Jacques et al., oval. Scalp hairs on people of African descent also are oval, 1998; Zhou, Byrne, Jacobs, & Fuchs, 1995). The particular causing their hair to be curly (James et al., 2006).

spacing and allocation of the follicles are determined by genes Hair color is determined by the distribution of melano-that are expressed very early in the morphogenesis of the somes in the hair shaft. The hair bulb contains melanocytes follicles (Paus & Cotsarelis; St-Jacques et al.). Mesenchymal that synthesize melanosomes and transfer them to the kera-cells in the fetal dermis aggregate below the basal layer of tinocytes of the bulb matrix. People of African descent tend the epidermis during embryogenesis (James et al., 2006).

to have larger melanosomes than Caucasians, whose smaller The basophilic cells in the basal cell layer of the epidermis melanosomes are amassed into membrane-bound complexes.

overlying these mesenchymal cell sites are induced to grow Red hair contains spherical melanosomes. Aging causes a loss at a downward angle into the dermis (Murphy, 1997). The of melanocytes and a corresponding decrease in the produc-follicle continues to develop until finally widening at the tion of melanosomes and results in graying hair (James et base and forming a bulb around the group of mesenchymal al., 2006).

6



CHAPTER 1. ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SKIN

impressive effect are the androgens: testosterone and its active Figure 1-4. Hair Follicle Structure metabolite, dihydrotestosterone, which act through androgen receptors in the dermal papilla. These hormones increase the size of hair follicles in androgen-dependent areas such as the beard area during adolescence. Later in life, however, they can cause miniaturization of follicles in the scalp resulting in androgen alopecia (male pattern baldness) (Kaufman, 1996; Sawaya, 1994).

Except for rare congenital hair defects caused by mutations in keratins or other structural proteins and scarring alopecias, hair loss and unwanted hair growth reflect deviations of hair follicle cycling and, therefore, are considered reversible events (Paus, 1996). The hair cycle can vary depending on a number of different physiologic factors. Pregnancy, for example, often results in a prolongation of the telogen phase and an increased number of scalp hairs in the anagen phase. When estrogen levels equilibrate after delivery, telogen hairs are lost while anagen hairs simultaneously are converted to telogen, and this great quantity of telogen hairs will be lost in three to five months. The synchronous termination of anagen or telogen is known as telogen effluvium and is often observed after trauma, such as childbirth, surgery, weight loss, and severe stress, and also is associated with drugs, endocrine disorders, anemia, and Note. From Andrews’ Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology malnutrition (James et al., 2006). Regrowth typically follows, (10th ed., p. 8), by W.D. James, T.G. Berger, and D.M. Elston, 2006, Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders. Copyright 2006 by El-with the exception of any metabolic or nutritional deficiency sevier Saunders. Reprinted with permission.

(Headington, 1993; Paus & Cotsarelis, 1999).

Sebaceous Glands

Hair growth occurs in a cyclical manner, but each follicle functions as an independent unit. The hair growth cell cycle is Sebaceous glands are found in greatest number on the composed of three stages: anagen, catagen, and telogen (see face and scalp but are present on nearly all other locations Figure 1-5) (Millar, 1997; Paus, 1996; St-Jacques et al., 1998).

of the body with the exception of the tarsal plate of the eye-Anagen, the active growth stage, typically lasts approximately lids, the buccal mucosa and vermilion borders of the lip, the three to five years on the scalp, during which hairs grow at a prepuce and mucosa lateral to the penile frenulum, the labia rate of about 0.33 mm per day. The length of the anagen phase minora, and the female areola (James et al., 2006). Cells of decreases with age and decreases dramatically in individuals the sebaceous glands contain abundant lipid droplets known with alopecia (James et al., 2006).

as sebum in their cytoplasm and are arranged into lobules off Catagen usually lasts about two weeks and is a period of the upper segment of the hair follicle. Basaloid germinative involution resulting in club hair formation after many cells cells surrounding the lobule give rise to the lipid-filled cells, in the outer root sheath undergo apoptosis. The resting phase, which are then expelled into the infundibular segment of the telogen, lasts about three to five months on the scalp, and hair follicle via the sebaceous duct. The sebaceous glands are hairs in this stage are eventually pushed out by the growing thought to be evolutionarily important in providing a second-anagen hair shaft. Other sites on the body tend to have shorter ary lubrication during the passage through the birth canal.

anagen and longer telogen phases, causing most body hair This extra lubrication covers the surfaces that come in direct to be shorter and remain in place for longer periods of time contact with the birth canal including the vertex, anterior (James et al., 2006).

scalp over the forehead and nose to the lower jaw line, and Two secreted molecules that may have important roles the shoulders, chest, and upper aspect of arms posteriorly in hair follicle development and cycling are the insulin-like (Danby, 2005; Thiboutot, 2004).

growth factor 1 and fibroblast growth factor 7. In mice, both are produced by the dermal papilla and have receptors pre-Nails

dominantly in overlying matrix cells (Danilenko, Ring, & Pierce, 1996). Hormonal factors controlling hair growth in-Fingernails provide protection to the fingertips, enhance clude estrogens, thyroid hormones, glucocorticoids, retinoids, sensation, and allow small objects to be grasped. The un-prolactin, and growth hormone. The hormones with the most derlying nail bed is part of the nail matrix containing blood 7



SKIN CANCER

Figure 1-5. Phases of Hair Growth

Note. From Andrews’ Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology (10th ed., p. 9), by W.D. James, T.G. Berger, and D.M. Elston, 2006, Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders. Copyright 2006 by Elsevier Saunders. Reprinted with permission.

vessels, nerves, and melanocytes and has parallel rete ridges.

differentiation that parallels epidermal differentiation, but the The nail plate is formed from matrix keratinocytes (James et structure and organization of the connective tissue components al., 2006).

are predictable in a depth-dependent manner. The matrix Fingernails grow at an average rate of 0.1 mm per day, two components, including collagen and elastic connective tissue, to three times faster than the rate of toenail growth. Because also vary in a depth-dependent manner and undergo turnover of the slow growth rate, toenails can provide information and remodeling in normal skin, in pathologic processes, and about toxic exposure or disease from many months in the past in response to external stimuli (Chu, 2008).

(James et al., 2006). For example, arsenic poisoning may cause The constituents of the dermis are mesodermal in origin a horizontal hypopigmentation across all nail plates known as except for nerves, which, like melanocytes, derive from the Mees lines (Daniel & Scher, 1997).

neural crest. Until the sixth week of fetal life, the dermis is merely a pool of dendritic-shaped cells full of acid-mucopolysaccharides, which are the precursors of fibroblasts. By The Dermis

the 12th week, fibroblasts are actively synthesizing reticu-lum fibers, elastic fibers, and collagen. A vascular network The dermis is an integrated system of fibrous, filamen-develops and fat cells have appeared beneath the dermis by tous, and amorphous connective tissue that accommodates the 24th week. Infant dermis is composed of small collagen stimulus-induced entry by nerve and vascular networks, bundles, whereas the adult dermis contains thicker bundles epidermally derived appendages, fibroblasts, macrophages, of collagen. Many fibroblasts are present in the infant dermis, and mast cells. Other blood-borne cells, including lympho-but few persist in adulthood (James et al., 2006).

cytes, plasma cells, and other leukocytes, enter the dermis The principal component of the dermis is collagen, a fi-in response to various stimuli as well. The dermis comprises brous family of proteins with at least 15 genetically distinct the bulk of the skin and provides its pliability, elasticity, and types in human skin. A major structural protein for the entire tensile strength. It protects the body from mechanical injury, body, collagen is found in tendons, ligaments, the lining of binds water, aids in thermal regulation, and includes receptors bones, and the dermis. Collagen is a major stress-resistant ma-of sensory stimuli. The dermis interacts with the epidermis terial of the skin. Elastic fibers, on the other hand, play a role in maintaining the properties of both tissues. The two regions in maintaining elasticity but do very little to resist deformation collaborate during development in the morphogenesis of the and tearing of the skin. Collagen fibers exist in a constant state dermal-epidermal junction and epidermal appendages and of flux, being degraded by proteolytic enzymes called spare interact in repairing and remodeling the skin as wounds are collagenases and replaced by new fibers. Collagen represents healed. The dermis does not undergo an obvious sequence of 70% of the skin’s dry weight (James et al., 2006).

8

CHAPTER 1. ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SKIN

Fibroblasts integrate the procollagen molecule, a specific the nipples. The location of the nucleus in the center of the helical polypeptide chain. Then, the cell secretes the fibro-muscle cell and the absence of striation distinguishes smooth blasts, and they assemble into collagen fibrils. The amino acids muscle from striated muscle (Murphy, 1997). The muscle glysine, hydroxyproline, and hydroxylysine highly enrich fibers of the arrectores pilorum are located in the connective collagen. The fibrillar collagens found in the skin comprise tissue of the upper dermis and are attached to the hair follicle the major group and are the most abundant proteins in the below the sebaceous glands. They are situated at such an angle body. The major constituent of the dermis is type I collagen.

to the hair follicle that when contracted, the hair follicle is Loosely positioned collagen fibers are found in the papillary pulled into a vertical position, deforming the skin and causing and adventitial dermis, whereas hefty collagen bundles are

“gooseflesh” (James et al., 2006). Different configurations noted in the reticular dermis. Type IV collagen is found in the make up small bundles of smooth muscle of the muscularis of basement membrane zone, and the major structural component veins and arteries. Glomus bodies are specialized aggregates of anchoring fibrils is collagen type VII, which is produced of smooth muscle found between the arterioles and venules, primarily by keratinocytes (James et al., 2006).

which exist on the digits and lateral aspects of the palms The elastic fiber differs both structurally and chemically and soles. They regulate body temperature and shunt blood from collagen and consists of two components: protein fila-

(James et al.).

ments and elastin, an amorphous protein. The fibroblast fuses Striated or voluntary muscle is found in the skin of the elastic fiber to the extracellular matrix of the dermis, which is neck as platysma and in the skin of the face as muscle of composed of glycosaminoglycans. The fibers are fine in the expression. The superficial muscular aponeurotic system papillary dermis and coarse in the reticular dermis. Hyaluronic is an intricate network of muscle, fascia, and aponeuroses acid is a minor component of the normal dermis but is the connecting muscles with the parts that they move (James et major mucopolysaccharide that accumulates in pathologic al., 2006).

states (James et al., 2006).

Nerves

Vasculature

Nerve bundles, together with arterioles and venules, are The dermal vasculature is made up of two intercom-found in great quantity in neurovascular bundles of the dermis municating plexuses: the subpapillary or superficial plexus (James et al., 2006). Meissner corpuscles, found in the dermal composed of postcapillary venules found at the junction of the papillae, help to mediate touch and are found predominantly papillary and reticular dermis and the lower plexus at the der-on the ventral sides of the hands and feet. Meissner corpuscles mal-subcutaneous interface. The dermal papillae are supplied occur in greater abundance on the hands, with greatest con-by capillaries, end arterioles, and venules of the superficial centration in the fingertips. Vater-Pacini corpuscles are large plexus. The deeper plexus is supplied by larger blood vessels nerve-end organs that generate a sense of pressure and are and is more complex surrounding adnexal structures.

located in the deeper portion of the dermis of weight-bearing Blood flow in human skin fluctuates significantly in surfaces and genitalia. They also are found commonly in the response to thermal stress because of the regulation of the nipple and anogenital region. Pain, temperature, and itch preoptic-anterior hypothalamus (Boulant, 2000). Vasodilation sensation are transmitted by unmyelinated nerve fibers that and increased skin blood flow, along with sweating, are crucial end around hair follicles and the papillary dermis (James to heat dissipation during heat exposure and exercise. During et al.).

exposure to cold, vasoconstriction in the skin decreases heat Vasoconstriction is regulated by the postganglionic adren-loss from the body to prevent hypothermia. Altered control of ergic fibers of the autonomic nervous system. This system skin blood flow can considerably impair the ability to maintain regulates the apocrine gland secretions and the contraction normal body temperature (Charkoudian, 2003). For example, of AP muscles of hair follicles. Eccrine sweat secretions, on impairments in cutaneous vascular control noted in patients with the other hand, are mediated by cholinergic fibers (James et type II diabetes may contribute to the increased incidence of heat al., 2006).

stroke and heat exhaustion during periods of elevated external temperatures. Similarly, menopausal hormones result in the Mast Cells

occurrence of hot flashes (Brooks et al., 1997; Schuman, 1972; Semenza, McCullough, Flanders, McGeehin, & Lumpkin, 1999; Mast cells are specialized secretory cells derived from Tankersley, Nicholas, Deaver, Mikita, & Kenney, 1992).

bone marrow and distributed in connective tissues throughout the body. Although present in greatest numbers in the Muscles

papillary dermis, they also are present in the subcutaneous fat (Chu, 2008). In the normal dermis, mast cells appear as Involuntary or smooth muscle of the skin occurs as AP, oval to spindle-shaped cells with a centrally located round to tunica dartos of the external genitals, and the areolas around oval nucleus. Numerous mast cells are located around blood 9

SKIN CANCER

vessels, especially postcapillary venules. Upon magnifica-cell proliferation in the epidermis and in epithelial tissue in tion, mast cells reveal numerous large and long villi at their general and the fact that this tissue is most frequently exposed periphery. Mast cell granules are round, oval, or angular to physical and chemical damage result in the exceedingly membrane-bound structures containing histamine, heparin, high rate of skin cancers found in humans as compared with serine proteinases, and certain cytokines (Murphy, 1997). The other types of cancer.

cell’s surface contains hundreds of thousands of glycoprotein receptor sites for immunoglobulin E. Type I or connective tissue mast cells are located in the dermis and submucosa. Type References

II or mucosal mast cells are located in the respiratory tract mucosa and in the bowel (James et al., 2006).

Aumailley, M., & Krieg, T. (1996). Laminins: A family of diverse Mast cells accumulate in the skin because of abnormal multifunctional molecules of basement membranes. Journal of Investigative Dermatology, 106(2), 209–214.

proliferation, migration, and failure of apoptosis when mas-Boulant, J.A. (2000). Role of the preoptic-anterior hypothalamus tocytosis occurs. Traditionally associated with the allergic in thermoregulation and fever. Clinical Infectious Diseases, response, more recent studies suggest that these cells also may 31(Suppl. 5), S157–S161.

be capable of regulating inflammation, host defense, and in-Brooks, E.M., Morgan, A.L., Pierzga, J.M., Wladkowski, S.L., nate immunity. Mast cells can undergo activation by antigens O’Gorman, J.T., Derr, J.A., et al. (1997). Chronic hormone replacement therapy alters thermoregulatory and vasomotor func-or allergens acting via the high-affinity receptor for immuno-tion in postmenopausal women. Journal of Applied Physiology, globulin E, superoxides, complement proteins, neuropeptides, 83(2), 477–484.

and lipoproteins. After activation, mast cells express histamine, Caputo, R., & Peluchetti, D. (1977). The junctions of normal human leukotrienes, prostanoids, proteases, and many cytokines and epidermis: A freeze-fracture study. Journal of Ultrastructure chemokines. These mediators may be pivotal to the genesis Research, 61(1), 44–61.

Charkoudian, N. (2003). Skin blood flow in adult human thermo-of an inflammatory response. By virtue of their location and regulation: How it works, when it works, when it does not, and mediator expression, mast cells are thought to play an active why. Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 78(5), 603–612.

role in many conditions such as allergy, parasitic diseases, Chu, D.H. (2008). Overview of biology, development, and structure atherosclerosis, malignancy, asthma, pulmonary fibrosis, and of skin. In K. Wolff, L.A. Goldsmith, S.I. Katz, B.A. Gilchrest, A.S.

arthritis (Krishnaswamy, Ajitawi, & Chi, 2006).

Paller, & D.J. Leffell (Eds.), Fitzpatrick’s dermatology in general medicine (7th ed., pp. 57–73). New York: McGraw-Hill.

Cotsarelis, G., Sun, T.T., & Lavker, R.M., (1990). Label-retaining cells reside in the bulge of the pilosebaceous unit: Implications Subcutaneous Fat

for follicular stem cells, hair cycle, and skin carcinogenesis. Cell, 61(7), 1329–1337.

Embryologically, toward the end of the fifth month fat cells Danby, F.W. (2005). Why we have sebaceous glands. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology, 52(6), 1071–1072.

begin to develop in the subcutaneous tissue. These lobules Daniel, R.C., & Scher, R.K. (1997). Nail changes secondary to of fat cells or lipocytes are separated by fibrous septa made systemic drugs and ingestants. In R.K. Scher & R.C. Daniel up of large blood vessels and collagen. The panniculus var-

(Eds.), Nails: Therapy, diagnosis, surgery (2nd ed., pp. 251–258).

ies in thickness depending on the skin site. Considered an Philadelphia: Saunders.

endocrine organ, the subcutaneous tissue provides the body Danilenko, D.M., Ring, B.D., & Pierce, G.F. (1996). Growth factors and cytokines in hair follicle development and cycling: Recent with buoyancy and functions as a storehouse of energy. Hor-insights from animal models and the potentials for clinical therapy.

mone conversion takes place in the panniculus, converting Molecular Medicine Today, 2(11), 460–467.

androstenedione into estrone by aromatase. Lipocytes produce Fairley, J.A., Scott, G.A., Jensen, K.D., Goldsmith, L.A., & Diaz, L.A.

leptin, a hormone that regulates body weight by way of the (1991). Characterization of keratocalmin, a calmodulin-binding hypothalamus (James et al., 2006).

protein from human epidermis. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 88(1), 315–322.

Flaxman, B.A., Sosis, A.C., & Van Scott, E.G. (1973). Changes in melanosome distribution in Caucasoid skin following topical Summary

application of nitrogen mustard. Journal of Investigative Dermatology, 60(5), 321–326.

The three layers of the skin form an effective barrier to Gayraud, B., Hopfner, B., Jassim, A., Aumailley, M., & Bruckner-Tuderman, L. (1997). Characterization of a 50-kDa component the external environment, allow the transmission of sensory of epithelial basement membranes using GDA-J/F3 monoclonal information, and serve a significant role in maintaining ho-antibody. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 272(14), 9531–9538.

meostasis. The dynamic epidermis continually produces a pro-Haake, A.R., & Hollbrook, K. (1999). The structure and develop-tective outer layer of corneocytes as cells undergo the process ment of skin. In I. Freedberg, A. Eisen, K. Wolff, K. Austen, L.

of keratinization and terminal differentiation. Collagen and Goldsmith, S. Katz, et al. (Eds.), Fitzpatrick’s dermatology in general medicine (5th ed., pp. 70–111). New York: McGraw-elastic filaments of the dermal layer provide the underlying Hill.

tensile strength of the skin, whereas the layer of subcutaneous Hashimoto, K. (1970a). The ultrastructure of the skin of human fat provides a store of energy for the body. The high rate of embryos V: The hair germ and perifollicular mesenchymal cells.

10

CHAPTER 1. ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SKIN

Hair germ-mesenchyma interaction. British Journal of Dermatol-membrane interactions and signal transduction. Molecular biology ogy, 83(1), 167–176.

intelligence unit (pp. 87–102). Austin, TX: Landes Bioscience.

Hashimoto, K. (1970b). The ultrastructure of the skin of human Moll, I. (1994). Merkel cell distribution in human hair follicles embryos IX: Formation of the hair cone and intraepidermal hair of the fetal and adult scalp. Cell and Tissue Research, 277(1), canal. Archiv für Klinische und Experimentelle Dermatologie, 131–138.

238(4), 333–345.

Murphy, G.F. (1997). Histology of the skin. In D. Elder, R. Elenitsas, Headington, J.T. (1993). Telogen effluvium: New concepts and C. Jaworsky, & B. Johnson, Jr. (Eds.), Lever’s histopathology of review. Archives of Dermatology, 129(3), 356–363.

the skin (8th ed., pp. 5–45). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams Hennings, H., & Holbrook, K.A. (1983). Calcium regulation of

& Wilkins.

cell-cell contact and differentiation of epidermal cells in culture: Olson, R.L., Nordquist, J., & Everett, M.A. (1970). The role of An ultrastructural study. Experimental Cell Research, 143(1), epidermal lysosomes in melanin physiology. British Journal of 127–142.

Dermatology, 83(1), 189–199.

Jackson, S.M., Williams, M.L., Feingold, K.R., & Elias, P.M. (1993).

Paus, R. (1996). Control of the hair cycle and hair diseases as cycling Pathobiology of the stratum corneum. Western Journal of Medi-disorders. Current Opinion in Dermatology, 3, 248–258.

cine, 158(3), 279–285.

Paus, R., & Cotsarelis, G. (1999). The biology of hair follicles. New James, W.D., Berger, T.G., & Elston, D.M. (2006). Andrews’ dis-England Journal of Medicine, 341(7), 491–497.

eases of the skin: Clinical dermatology (10th ed.). Philadelphia: Paus, R., Foitzik, K., Welker, P., Bulfone-Paus, S., & Eichmuller, S.

Elsevier Saunders.

(1997). Transforming growth factor beta receptor type I and type Jones, P.H. (1996). Isolation and characterization of human epidermal II expression during murine hair follicle development and cycling.

stem cells. Clinical Science, 91(2), 141–146.

Journal of Investigative Dermatology, 109(4), 518–526.

Kanitakis, J. (2002). Anatomy, histology and immunohistochemistry Sato, K., & Dobson, R.L. (1970). Regional and individual varia-of normal human skin. European Journal of Dermatology, 12(4), tions in the function of the human eccrine sweat gland. Journal 390–401.

of Investigative Dermatology, 54(6), 443–449.

Kaufman, K.D. (1996). Androgen metabolism as it affects hair Sawaya, M.E. (1994). Biochemical mechanisms regulating human growth in androgenetic alopecia. Dermatologic Clinics, 14(4), hair growth. Skin Pharmacology, 7(1–2), 5–7.

697–711.

Schuman, S.H. (1972). Patterns of urban heat wave deaths and impli-Kerr, J.F., Wyllie, A.H., & Currie, A.R. (1972). Apoptosis: A basic cations for prevention: Data from New York and St. Louis during biological phenomenon with wide-ranging implication in tissue July 1966. Environmental Research, 5(1), 59–75.

kinetics. British Journal of Cancer, 26(4), 239–257.

Schwarz, E. (1979). Biochemie der epidermalen keratinisation. In A.

Kratochwil, K., Dull, M., Farinas, I., Galceran, J., & Grosschedl, Marchionini (Ed.), Handbuch der hautund geschlectskrankheiten R. (1996). LeF1 expression is activated by BMP-4 and regulates (Vol. I). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

inductive tissue interactions in tooth and hair development. Genes Semenza, J.C., McCullough, J.E., Flanders, W.D., McGeehin, M.A., and Development, 10(11), 1382–1394.

& Lumpkin, J.R. (1999). Excess hospital admissions during the Krishnaswamy, G., Ajitawi, O., & Chi, D.S. (2006). The human mast July 1995 heat wave in Chicago. American Journal of Preventive cell: An overview. In G. Krishnaswamy & D. Chi (Eds.), Molecular Medicine, 16(4), 269–277.

biology: Vol. 315. Mast cells: Methods and protocols (pp. 13–34).

St-Jacques, B., Dassule, H.R., Karavanova, I., Botchkarev, V.A., Li, J., Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.

Danielian, P.S., et al. (1998). Sonic hedgehog signaling is essential Lavker, R.M., & Sun, T.T. (1982). Heterogeneity in basal kerati-for hair development. Current Biology, 8(19), 1058–1068.

nocytes: Morphological and functional correlations. Science, Stepp, M.A., Spurr-Michaud, S., Tisdale, A., Elwell, J., & Gipson, 215(4537), 1239–1241.

I.K. (1990). Alpha 6 beta 4 integrin heterodimer is a component Lin, M.S., Mascaro, J.M., Jr., Liu, Z., Espana, A., & Diaz, L.A.

of hemidesmosomes. Proceedings of the National Academy of (1997). The desmosome and hemidesmosome in cutaneous au-Sciences of the United States of America, 87(22), 8970–8974.

toimmunity. Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 107(Suppl.

Tankersley, C.G., Nicholas, W.C., Deaver, D.R., Mikita, D., & Ken-1), 9–15.

ney, W.L. (1992). Estrogen replacement in middle-aged women: Masunaga, T., Shimizu, H., Ishiko, A., Tomita, Y., Aberdam, D., Thermoregulatory responses to exercise in the heat. Journal of Ortonne, J.P., et al. (1996). Localization of laminin-5 in the Applied Physiology, 73(4), 1238–1245.

epidermal basement membrane. Journal of Histochemistry and Thiboutot, D. (2004). Regulation of human sebaceous glands. Journal Cytochemistry, 44(11), 1223–1230.

of Investigative Dermatology, 123(1), 1–12.

Matoltsy, A.G. (1976). Keratinization. Journal of Investigative Der-Udey, M.C. (1997). Cadherins and Langerhans cell immunobiology.

matology, 67(1), 20–25.

Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 107(Suppl. 1), 6–8.

Mauro, T., & Goldsmith, L. (2008). Biology of eccrine, apocrine, Wheelock, M.J., & Jensen, P.J. (1992). Regulation of keratino-and apoeccrine sweat glands. In K. Wolff, L.A. Goldsmith, S.I.

cyte intercellular junction organization and epidermal mor-Katz, B.A. Gilchrest, A.S. Paller, & D.J. Leffell (Eds.), Fitzpatrick’s phogenesis by E-cadherin. Journal of Cell Biology, 117(2), dermatology in general medicine (7th ed., pp. 713–720). New 415–425.

York: McGraw-Hill.

Zhou, P., Byrne, C., Jacobs, J., & Fuchs, E. (1995). Lymphoid en-Millar, S. (1997). The role of patterning genes in epidermal differ-hancer factor 1 directs hair follicle patterning and epithelial cell entiation. In P. Cowin & M.W. Klymkowsky (Eds.), Cytoskeletal-fate. Genes and Development, 9(6), 700–713.

11





